ASEAN Guide on
AI Governance and Ethics
Contents




Executive Summary                                03 D. National-level Recommendations          46
A. Introduction                                  06 E. Regional-level Recommendations          53
1. Objectives                                    08 F. Conclusion                              58
2. Assumptions                                   08
3. Target Audience                               09 Annex A: AI Risk Impact Assessment Template 60
4. Definitions                                   09 Annex B: Use Cases                         73

B. Guiding Principles for the Framework          10 1. Aboitiz Group                           74

1. Transparency and Explainability               11 2. EY                                      76

2. Fairness and Equity                           12 3. Gojek                                   78

3. Security and Safety                           13 4. UCARE.AI                                80

4. Human-centricity                              14 5. Smart Nation Group (SNG), Singapore     83

5. Privacy and Data Governance                   14 6. Ministry of Education, Singapore        85

6. Accountability and Integrity                  15
7. Robustness and Reliability                    16

C. AI Governance Framework                       17
1. Internal governance structures and measures   18
2. Determining the level of human involvement
   in AI-augmented decision-making               23
3. Operations management                         27
4. Stakeholder interaction and communication     41
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Executive Summary

      What the Guide is about

      This document serves as a practical guide for organisations in the region that wish to design, develop, and
      deploy traditional AI technologies in commercial and non-military or dual-use applications. This Guide focuses
      on encouraging alignment within ASEAN and fostering the interoperability of AI frameworks across
      jurisdictions. It also includes recommendations on national-level and regional-level initiatives that
      governments in the region can consider implementing to design, develop, and deploy AI systems responsibly.


      Guiding Principles for the Framework


           Transparency
                                          Fairness and              Security and                    Robustness and
               and
                                             Equity                   Safety                          Reliability
           Explainability




                       Human-centricity             Privacy and Data               Accountability
                                                      Governance                   and Integrity




      4 Key Components



                    Internal governance structures and measures

                    • Multi-disciplinary, central governing body, such as an AI Ethics Advisory Board, to
                      oversee AI governance efforts

                    • Develop standards, guidelines, tools, and templates to help organisations design,
                      develop, and deploy AI responsibly

                    • Clearly lay out the roles and responsibilities of personnel involved in the responsible
                      design, development and/or deployment of AI




                    Determining the level of human involvement in AI-augmented decision-making

                    • Conduct relevant risk impact assessments to determine level of risk

                    • Three broad categories of human involvement based on level of risk – human-in-the-loop,
                      human-over-the-loop, human-out-of-the-loop

                    • Mitigating risks helps build trust towards the acceptance and greater use of AI
                      technologies in the region

                                                                                                                     3
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                    Operations management

                    • The AI System Lifecycle consists of
                      various stages and is often an iterative
                      process

                    • Conduct risk-based assessments before
                      starting any data collection and
                      processing or modelling

                    • Mitigate risks of unjust bias due to
                      insufficiently representative training,
                      testing and validation datasets




                    Stakeholder interaction and communication

                    • Develop trust with stakeholders throughout the design, development, and deployment of
                      AI

                    • Provide general disclosure of when AI is used in products and/or service offerings

                    • Put in place measures to help employees adapt to an AI-augmented work environment



      National-level Recommendations


            Nurturing AI talent and upskilling workforce

            Work closely with public and private sectors to ensure that a country’s workforce can adapt to the new
            ways of working and possesses enough digital skills to interact effectively with AI systems.

           Supporting AI innovation ecosystem and promoting investment in AI start-ups

           Work closely with public and private sectors to create a supportive environment for AI development,
           where companies are able to access and leverage data, digital technologies, and infrastructure.

            Investing in AI research and development

            Keep abreast of the latest developments in AI and encourage research related to the cybersecurity of AI,
            AI governance, and AI ethics to ensure that the safety and resiliency of AI systems and tools also
            advance in parallel with new use cases.

           Promoting adoption of useful tools by businesses to implement the ASEAN Guide on AI
           Governance and Ethics

           Deploy tools to enable the implementation of AI governance in operations and ensure that
           documentation and validation processes are more efficient.

           Raising awareness among citizens on the effects of AI in society

           Raise awareness of the potential risks and benefits of AI so citizens can make informed decisions about
           the appropriate use of AI and take appropriate actions to protect themselves from harmful uses of AI
           systems.
                                                                                                                  4
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Regional-level recommendations


             Setting up an ASEAN Working Group on AI Governance to drive and oversee AI governance
             initiatives in the region

             The Working Group can consist of representatives from each of the ASEAN member states who can
             work together to roll out the recommendations laid out in this Guide, as well as provide guidance for
             ASEAN countries who wish to adopt components of this Guide, and where appropriate, include
             consultation with other industry partners for their views and input.

             Adaptation of this Guide to address governance of generative AI

             Risks include:                                        Governance should include:

             • Mistakes and anthropomorphism                       • Adaptation of existing frameworks and tools

             • Factually inaccurate responses and disinformation   • Guidance on developing a shared
                                                                     responsibility framework
             • Deepfakes, impersonation, fraudulent and
               malicious activities                                • Guidance on increasing the capacity to
                                                                     manage risks of generative AI
             • Infringement of intellectual property rights
                                                                   • Guidance on how to distinguish AI-
             • Privacy and confidentiality
                                                                     generated content versus authentically
             • Propagation of embedded biases                        generated ones

             Compiling a compendium of use cases demonstrating practical implementation of the Guide
             by organisations operating in ASEAN

             A compendium of use cases showcases the commitment of these organisations to AI governance
             and helps them promote themselves as responsible AI practitioners.



      Use Cases

       Illustration of components of the ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics through use cases of
       organisations operating in ASEAN that have implemented AI governance measures in AI design,
       development, and deployment.


            Gojek                                Aboitiz Group                 Smart Nation Group (SNG), Singapore


            UCARE.AI                             EY                            Ministry of Education, Singapore




                                                                                                                   5
Introduction
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      A. Introduction

      Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the discipline of making analytical machines intelligent, enabling an organisation to
      function appropriately and with foresight. Unlike other technologies, some forms of AI adapt on its own,
      learning through use, so the decisions it makes today may be different from those it makes tomorrow. AI and
      automation have been hot topics, both for their transformative potential and for their capacity to introduce new
      opportunities by disrupting old models. Southeast Asia is no exception. AI systems should be treated
      differently from other software systems because of its unique characteristics and risks. Capabilities of AI
      systems fuelled by techniques evolution and breakthroughs are quickly outpacing the monitoring and
      validation tools. The development of AI is also decentralised due to low barriers to entry and the proliferation
      of open-source technologies. Given the profound impact that AI potentially brings to organisations and
      individuals in ASEAN, it is important that the decisions made by AI are aligned with national and corporate
      values, as well as broader ethical and social norms.

      Also, the ASEAN Digital Masterplan 2025 (ADM2025) developed by ASEAN Member States (“AMS”)
      envisions ASEAN as a leading digital community and economic bloc, powered by secure and transformative
      digital services, technologies, and ecosystem. In that context, the ADM2025 has identified Enabling Action
      (EA) 2.7 that suggests the development and adoption of a regional policy to deliver best practice guidance on
      AI governance and ethics. In recent years, governments and international organisations have begun issuing
      principles, frameworks and recommendations on AI ethics and governance. Examples include Singapore’s
      Model AI Governance Framework1 and OECD’s Recommendation of the Council on AI2. However, there has
      not yet been an intergovernmental common standard for AI that defines the principles of AI governance and
      provides guidance for policymakers in the region to utilise AI systems in a responsible and ethical manner. In
      the process of drafting this Guide, existing AI governance frameworks and guidelines such as UNESCO’s
      Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence3 and EU’s Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI were
      referenced4.

      The ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics aims to empower organisations and governments in the
      region to design, develop, and deploy traditional AI systems responsibly and increase users’ trust in AI.




      1 Infocomm Media Development Authority, “Model Artificial Intelligence Governance Framework Second Edition” (21 January 2020)

      < https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/-/media/files/pdpc/pdf-files/resource-for-organisation/ai/sgmodelaigovframework2.pdf >
      2 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence” (22 May 2019)

      < https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0449 >
      3 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, “Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence” (23 November 2021)

       < https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000381137 >
      4 European Commission “Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI” < https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/library/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai >

      (8 April 2019)

                                                                                                                                                           7
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      1. Objectives

      This document serves as a practical guide for organisations in the region that wish to design, develop, and
      deploy traditional AI technologies in commercial and non-military or dual-use applications. This Guide focuses
      on encouraging alignment within ASEAN and fostering the interoperability of AI frameworks across
      jurisdictions. It also includes recommendations on national-level and regional-level initiatives that
      governments in the region can consider implementing to design, develop, and deploy AI systems responsibly.

      The ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics encompasses a broad range of considerations that needs to
      be tailored to the organisations designing, developing, and deploying AI depending on the nature of the
      industry, complexity of the technology, and associated risks of the AI systems. Local government authorities
      are encouraged to refer to this Guide when formulating their policies and approaches.

      While adoption of the framework laid out herein is voluntary, this Guide can help organisations build trust
      among stakeholders and the public as well as align their AI practices with international standards and best
      practices, among others. Organisations are encouraged to refer to the guidelines in this document to
      understand how to assess the risks associated with AI and take measures to design, develop, and deploy AI
      responsibly in the context of their organisations.

      This Guide is meant to be a living document that should be periodically reviewed and assessed by relevant
      ASEAN sectorial bodies, in consultation with industry partners, to ensure that it is up to date with the latest
      regulations and advancements in the AI space. Updates to this Guide may be published subsequently to keep
      up with evolutions and growth in governance and standards.


      2. Assumptions

      AI systems need to be managed holistically, including its ecosystem and all components – human operator,
      Internet of Things (IoT), robotics, traditional technology, vendors, etc. In addition to the recommendations set
      out in this Guide pertaining to AI governance, organisations are also encouraged to follow and refer to
      international standards and best practices in related fields like information security management systems
      (ISMS), data management and governance, software development and testing, cybersecurity, IoT, etc.

      Developers and deployers need to adhere to applicable national laws and regulations, including sector-
      specific laws and constitutions when designing, developing, and deploying AI technologies. The ASEAN
      Guide on AI Governance and Ethics does not replace or supersede any existing or upcoming laws and only
      serves as a guide for responsible design, development, and deployment of AI in the region. Before deploying
      AI, it is also important for developers and deployers to consider the relevant legal and regulatory requirements
      of the respective countries where the AI systems will be deployed, as well as the use context for legal, policy,
      and regulatory concerns.

      Given the fast-evolving space of AI, developers and deployers of AI systems should be mindful of the latest
      state of the art vis-à-vis governance tools and technologies and conduct the relevant assessments to evaluate
      the feasibility and usefulness of these tools in the implementation of AI governance practices in the design,
      development, and deployment of AI systems.




                                                                                                                    8
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      3. Target Audience

      The ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics is an ASEAN-endorsed framework for organisations in the
      region to refer to when designing, developing, and deploying traditional AI technologies. It provides guidelines
      and recommendations for a diverse range of individuals and organisations along the entire value chain. These
      include AI developers and deployers, academic professionals, and everyone that is interested in utilising or
      scaling up AI systems. The Guide also includes sections on national-level and regional-level
      recommendations that are more targeted towards policymakers in ASEAN.


      4. Definitions

      The definitions of several key terms used in this Guide are set out below.



       ASEAN: refers to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. It is a political and economic union of 10
       member states in Southeast Asia, which promotes intergovernmental cooperation and facilitates economic,
       political, security, military, educational, and sociocultural integration between its members and countries in
       the Asia-Pacific.

       Artificial Intelligence (AI): is an engineered or machine-based system that can, for a given set of
       objectives, generate outputs such as predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual
       environments.

       AI system: is a machine-based system that is capable of influencing the environment by producing an
       output (predictions, recommendations or decisions) for a given set of objectives. It uses machine and/or
       human-based data and inputs to (i) perceive real and/or virtual environments; (ii) abstract these perceptions
       into models through analysis in an automated manner (e.g., with machine learning), or manually; and (iii)
       use model inference to formulate options for outcomes. AI systems are designed to operate with varying
       levels of autonomy.

       Deep Learning: is a subset of machine learning. It is very loosely based on the information-processing
       architecture of the brain – albeit far from matching its ability – enabling systems to find ways of re-
       representing input data that facilitate making highly accurate predictions.

       Deployer: is an entity that uses or implements an AI system, which could either be developed by their in-
       house team or via a third-party developer.

       Developer: is an entity that designs, codes, or produces an AI system.

       Machine Learning: is a subfield in AI where algorithms learn by identifying patterns and correlations within
       data using statistical techniques to enhance performance, all without being explicitly programmed.

       User: is an entity or person (internal or external) that interacts with an AI system or an AI-enabled service
       and can be affected by its decisions.




                                                                                                                        9
Guiding Principles
for the Framework
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      B. Guiding Principles for the Framework

      The seven guiding principles below help to ensure trust in AI and the design, development, and
      deployment of ethical AI systems. They also provide guidance on how AI systems should be
      designed, developed, and deployed in ways which consider the broader societal impact.


      1. Transparency and Explainability

      Transparency refers to providing disclosure on when an AI system is being used and the involvement of an AI
      system in decision-making, what kind of data it uses, and its purpose. By disclosing to individuals that AI is
      used in the system, individuals will become aware and can make an informed choice of whether to use the AI-
      enabled system.

      Explainability is the ability to communicate the reasoning behind an AI system’s decision in a way that is
      understandable to a range of people, as it is not always clear how an AI system has arrived at a conclusion.
      This allows individuals to know the factors contributing to the AI system’s recommendation.

      In order to build public trust in AI, it is important to ensure that users are aware of the use of AI technology and
      understand how information from their interaction is used and how the AI system makes its decisions using
      the information provided.

      In line with the principle of transparency, deployers have a responsibility to clearly disclose the implementation
      of an AI system to stakeholders and foster general awareness of the AI system being used. With the
      increasing use of AI in many businesses and industries, the public is becoming more aware and interested in
      knowing when they are interacting with AI systems. Knowing when and how AI systems interact with users is
      also important in helping users discern the potential harm of interacting with an AI system that is not behaving
      as intended. In the past, AI algorithms have been found to discriminate against female job applicants and
      have failed to accurately recognise the faces of dark-skinned women. It is important for users to be aware of
      the expected behaviour of the AI systems so they can make more informed decisions about the potential harm
      of interacting with AI systems. An example of transparency in an AI-enabled ecommerce platform is informing
      users that their purchase history is used by the platform’s recommendation algorithm to identify similar
      products and display them on the users’ feeds.

      In line with the principle of explainability, developers and deployers designing, developing, and deploying AI
      systems should also strive to foster general understanding among users of how such systems work with
      simple and easy to understand explanations on how the AI system makes decisions. Understanding how AI
      systems work will help humans know when to trust its decisions. Explanations can have varying degrees of
      complexity, ranging from a simple text explanation of which factors more significantly affected the decision-
      making process to displaying a heatmap over the relevant text or on the area of an image that led to the
      system’s decision. For example, when an AI system is used to predict the likelihood of cardiac arrest in
      patients, explainability can be implemented by informing medical professionals of the most significant factors
      (e.g., age, blood pressure, etc.) that influenced the AI system’s decision so that they can subsequently make
      informed decisions on their own.

      Where “black box” models are deployed, rendering it difficult, if not impossible to provide explanations as to
      the workings of the AI system, outcome-based explanations, with a focus on explaining the impact of decision-
      making or results flowing from the AI system may be relied on.


                                                                                                                       11
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Alternatively, deployers may also consider focusing on aspects relating to the quality of the AI system or
      preparing information that could build user confidence in the outcomes of an AI system’s processing
      behaviour. Some of these measures are:

      •     Documenting the repeatability of results produced by the AI system. Some practices to demonstrate
            repeatability include conducting repeatability assessments to ensure deployments in live environments
            are repeatable and performing counterfactual fairness testing to ensure that the AI system’s decisions
            are the same in both the real world and in the counterfactual world. Repeatability refers to the ability of
            the system to consistently obtain the same results, given the same scenario. Repeatability often applies
            within the same environment, with the same data and the same computational conditions.

      •     Ensuring traceability by building an audit trail to document the AI system development and decision-
            making process, implementing a black box recorder that captures all input data streams, or storing data
            appropriately to avoid degradation and alteration.

      •     Facilitating auditability by keeping a comprehensive record of data provenance, procurement, pre-
            processing, lineage, storage, and security. Such information can also be centralised digitally in a
            process log to increase capacity to cater the presentation of results to different tiers of stakeholders with
            different interests and levels of expertise. Deployers should, however, note that auditability does not
            necessarily entail making certain confidential information about business models or intellectual property
            related to the AI system publicly available. A risk-based approach can be taken towards identifying the
            subset of AI-enabled features in the AI system for which implemented auditability is necessary to align
            with regulatory requirements or industry practices.

      •     Using AI Model Cards, which are short documents accompanying trained machine learning models that
            disclose the context in which models are intended to be used, details of the performance evaluation
            procedures, and other relevant information.

      In cases where AI systems are procured directly from developers, deployers will have to work together with
      these developers to achieve transparency. More on this will be covered in later sections of the Guide.




      2. Fairness and Equity

      Deployers should have safeguards in place to ensure that algorithmic decisions do not further exacerbate or
      amplify existing discriminatory or unjust impacts across different demographics and the design, development,
      and deployment of AI systems should not result in unfair biasness or discrimination. An example of such
      safeguards would include human interventions and checks on the algorithms and its outputs. Deployers of AI
      systems should conduct regular testing of such systems to confirm if there is bias and where bias is
      confirmed, make the necessary adjustments to rectify imbalances to ensure equity.

      With the rapid developments in the AI space, AI systems are increasingly used to aid decision-making. For
      example, AI systems are currently used to screen resumes in job application processes, predict the credit
      worthiness of consumers and provide agronomic advice to farmers. If not properly managed, an AI system’s
      outputs used to make decisions with significant impact on individuals could perpetuate existing discriminatory
      or unjust impacts to specific demographics. To mitigate discrimination, it is important that the design,
      development, and deployment of AI systems align with fairness and equity principles. In addition, the datasets
      used to train the AI systems should be diverse and representative. Appropriate measures should be taken to
      mitigate potential biases during data collection and pre-processing, training, and inference. For example, the

                                                                                                                      12
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      training and test dataset for an AI system used in the education sector should be adequately representative of
      the student population by including students of different genders and ethnicities.



      3. Security and Safety

      AI systems should be safe and sufficiently secure against malicious attacks.

      Safety refers to ensuring the safety of developers, deployers, and users of AI systems by conducting impact or
      risk assessments and ensuring that known risks have been identified and mitigated. A risk prevention
      approach should be adopted, and precautions should be put in place so that humans can intervene to prevent
      harm, or the system can safely disengage itself in the event an AI system makes unsafe decisions -
      autonomous vehicles that cause injury to pedestrians are an illustration of this. Ensuring that AI systems are
      safe is essential to fostering public trust in AI. Safety of the public and the users of AI systems should be of
      utmost priority in the decision-making process of AI systems and risks should be assessed and mitigated to
      the best extent possible. Before deploying AI systems, deployers should conduct risk assessments and
      relevant testing or certification and implement the appropriate level of human intervention to prevent harm
      when unsafe decisions take place. The risks, limitations, and safeguards of the use of AI should be made
      known to the user. For example, in AI-enabled autonomous vehicles, developers and deployers should put in
      place mechanisms for the human driver to easily resume manual driving whenever they wish.

      Security refers to ensuring the cybersecurity of AI systems, which includes mechanisms against malicious
      attacks specific to AI such as data poisoning, model inversion, the tampering of datasets, byzantine attacks in
      federated learning5, as well as other attacks designed to reverse engineer personal data used to train the AI.
      Deployers of AI systems should work with developers to put in place technical security measures like robust
      authentication mechanisms and encryption. Just like any other software, deployers should also implement
      safeguards to protect AI systems against cyberattacks, data security attacks, and other digital security risks.
      These may include ensuring regular software updates to AI systems and proper access management for
      critical or sensitive systems. Deployers should also develop incident response plans to safeguard AI systems
      from the above attacks.

      It is also important for deployers to make a minimum list of security testing (e.g. vulnerability assessment and
      penetration testing) and other applicable security testing tools. Some other important considerations also
      include:

      a.     Business continuity plan

      b.     Disaster recovery plan

      c.     Zero-day attacks

      d.     IoT devices




      5 A byzantine attack in federated learning is a type of malicious act where one or more of the devices or servers involved in the federated learning

      process behaves erratically or provides misleading updates to the central model, with the intent to corrupt or manipulate the learning process or
      outcomes.

                                                                                                                                                             13
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      4. Human-centricity

      AI systems should respect human-centred values and pursue benefits for human society, including human
      beings’ well-being, nutrition, happiness, etc.

      It is key to ensure that people benefit from AI design, development, and deployment while being protected
      from potential harms. AI systems should be used to promote human well-being and ensure benefit for all.
      Especially in instances where AI systems are used to make decisions about humans or aid them, it is
      imperative that these systems are designed with human benefit in mind and do not take advantage of
      vulnerable individuals.

      Human-centricity should be incorporated throughout the AI system lifecycle, starting from the design to
      development and deployment. Actions must be taken to understand the way users interact with the AI system,
      how it is perceived, and if there are any negative outcomes arising from its outputs. One example of how
      deployers can do this is to test the AI system with a small group of internal users from varied backgrounds and
      demographics and incorporate their feedback in the AI system.

      AI systems should not be used for malicious purposes or to sway or deceive users into making decisions that
      are not beneficial to them or society. In this regard, developers and deployers (if developing or designing in-
      house) should also ensure that dark patterns are avoided. Dark patterns refer to the use of certain design
      techniques to manipulate users and trick them into making decisions that they would otherwise not have
      made. An example of a dark pattern is employing the use of default options that do not consider the end
      user’s interests, such as for data sharing and tracking of the user’s other online activities.

      As an extension of human-centricity as a principle, it is also important to ensure that the adoption of AI
      systems and their deployment at scale do not unduly disrupt labour and job prospects without proper
      assessment. Deployers are encouraged to take up impact assessments to ensure a systematic and
      stakeholder-based review and consider how jobs can be redesigned to incorporate use of AI. Personal Data
      Protection Commission of Singapore’s (PDPC) Guide on Job Redesign in the Age of AI6 provides useful
      guidance to assist organisations in considering the impact of AI on its employees, and how work tasks can be
      redesigned to help employees embrace AI and move towards higher-value tasks.




      5. Privacy and Data Governance

      AI systems should have proper mechanisms in place to ensure data privacy and protection and maintain and
      protect the quality and integrity of data throughout their entire lifecycle. Data protocols need to be set up to
      govern who can access data and when data can be accessed.

      Data privacy and protection should be respected and upheld during the design, development, and deployment
      of AI systems. The way data is collected, stored, generated, and deleted throughout the AI system lifecycle
      must comply with applicable data protection laws, data governance legislation, and ethical principles. Some
      data protection and privacy laws in ASEAN include Malaysia’s Personal Data Protection Act 2010, the
      Philippines’ Data Privacy Act of 2012, Singapore’s Personal Data Protection Act 2012, Thailand’s Personal



      6 Personal Data Protection Commission Singapore, “A Guide to Job Redesign in the Age of AI” (2020) < https://file.go.gov.sg/ai-guide-to-

      jobredesign.pdf >


                                                                                                                                                 14
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Data Protection Act 2019, Indonesia’s Personal Data Protection Law 2022, and Vietnam’s Personal Data
      Protection Decree 2023.

      Organisations should be transparent about their data collection practices, including the types of data
      collected, how it is used, and who has access to it. Organisations should ensure that necessary consent is
      obtained from individuals before collecting, using, or disclosing personal data for AI development and
      deployment, or otherwise have appropriate legal basis to collect, use or disclose personal data without
      consent. Unnecessary or irrelevant data should not be gathered to prevent potential misuse.

      Data protection and governance frameworks should be set up and adhered to by developers and deployers of
      AI systems. These frameworks should also be periodically reviewed and updated in accordance with
      applicable privacy and data protection laws. For example, data protection impact assessments (DPIA) help
      organisations determine how data processing systems, procedures, or technologies affect individuals’ privacy
      and eliminate risks that might violate compliance7. However, it is important to note that DPIAs are much
      narrower in scope than an overall impact assessment for use of AI systems and are not sufficient as an AI risk
      assessment. Other components will need to be considered for a full assessment of risks associated with AI
      systems.

      Developers and deployers of AI systems should also incorporate a privacy-by-design principle when
      developing and deploying AI systems. Privacy-by-design is an approach that embeds privacy in every stage of
      the system development lifecycle. Data privacy is essential in gaining the public’s trust in technological
      advances. Another consideration is investing in privacy enhancing technologies to preserve privacy while
      allowing personal data to be used for innovation. Privacy enhancing technologies include, but are not limited
      to, differential privacy, where small changes are made to raw data to securely de-identify inputs without having
      a significant impact on the results of the AI system, and zero-knowledge proofs (ZKP), where ZKP hide the
      underlying data and answer simple questions about whether something is true or false without revealing
      additional information8.




      6. Accountability and Integrity

      There needs to be human accountability and control in the design, development, and deployment of AI
      systems. Deployers should be accountable for decisions made by AI systems and for the compliance with
      applicable laws and respect for AI ethics and principles. AI actors9 should act with integrity throughout the AI
      system lifecycle when designing, developing, and deploying AI systems.

      Deployers of AI systems should ensure the proper functioning of AI systems and its compliance with
      applicable laws, internal AI governance policies and ethical principles. In the event of a malfunction or misuse
      of the AI system that results in negative outcomes, responsible individuals should act with integrity and
      implement mitigating actions to prevent similar incidents from happening in the future.



      7 TechTarget, “data protection impact assessment (DPIA) (July 2023) < https://www.techtarget.com/searchcio/definition/data-protection-impact-

      assessment-DPIA >
      8 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Emerging Privacy Enhancing Technologies: Current Regulatory & Policy Approaches”

      (2023) < https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/bf121be4-
      en.pdf?expires=1693746418&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=E8DFEFFD75D87E3C3DBB30DE8B6773C9 >
      9 AI actors can be defined as any actor involved in at least one stage of the AI system life cycle, and can refer to both natural and legal persons, such

      as researchers, programmers, engineers, data scientists, end-users, business enterprises, universities and public and private entities, among others.

                                                                                                                                                             15
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      To facilitate the allocation of responsibilities, organisations should adopt clear reporting structures for internal
      governance, setting out clearly the different kinds of roles and responsibilities for those involved in the AI
      system lifecycle. AI systems should also be designed, developed, and deployed with integrity – any errors or
      unethical outcomes should at minimum be documented and corrected to prevent harm to users upon
      deployment.



      7. Robustness and Reliability

      AI systems should be sufficiently robust to cope with errors during execution and unexpected or erroneous
      input, or cope with stressful environmental conditions. It should also perform consistently. AI systems should,
      where possible, work reliably and have consistent results for a range of inputs and situations.

      AI systems may have to operate in real-world, dynamic conditions where input signals and conditions change
      quickly. To prevent harm, AI systems need to be resilient to unexpected data inputs, not exhibit dangerous
      behaviour, and continue to perform according to the intended purpose. Notably, AI systems are not infallible
      and deployers should ensure proper access control and protection of critical or sensitive systems and take
      actions to prevent or mitigate negative outcomes that occur due to unreliable performances.

      Deployers should conduct rigorous testing before deployment to ensure robustness and consistent results
      across a range of situations and environments. Measures such as proper documentation of data sources,
      tracking of data processing steps, and data lineage can help with troubleshooting AI systems.




                                                                                                                       16
AI Governance Framework
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      C. AI Governance Framework

      This section of the Guide includes guidance on measures promoting the responsible use of AI that
      organisations should adopt in the following key areas:



                                                                              Determining the level of human
                    Internal governance
                                                                              involvement in AI-augmented
                    structures and measures
                                                                              decision-making

           Adapting existing or setting up internal                 A methodology to aid organisations in setting
           governance structure and measures to                     its risk appetite for use of AI, i.e., determining
           incorporate values, risks, and responsibilities          acceptable risks and identifying an
           relating to algorithmic decision-making.                 appropriate level of human involvement in
                                                                    AI-augmented decision-making.




                                                                              Stakeholder interaction and
                    Operations management
                                                                              communication


           Issues to be considered when developing,                 Strategies for communicating with an
           selecting, and maintaining AI models,                    organisation’s stakeholders, and the
           including data management.                               management of relationships with them.




      1. Internal governance structures and measures

      Internal governance structures need to be put in place for companies to have oversight of how AI systems are
      designed, developed, and deployed across the organisation. Deployers may choose to set up a new
      governance structure or adapt existing ones. For example, existing risk management structures can be used
      to evaluate and manage the risks of AI systems as well. Deployers can also consider setting up a multi-
      disciplinary, central governing body, such as an AI Ethics Advisory Board or Ethics Committee, to oversee AI
      governance efforts, provide independent advice, and develop standards, guidelines, tools, and templates to
      help other teams design, develop, and deploy AI responsibly. The AI Ethics Board or Committee should strive
      to be multi-disciplinary, and advisors can be drawn from ethics, law, philosophy, technology, privacy,
      regulations, science, and other relevant domains. To adequately reflect the diversity of society, there is also
      value in considering a governing body that is sufficiently representative of stakeholders and a range of voices.
      The ethical implications of AI can be complex to navigate and setting up an Ethics Committee of experts from
      different disciplines and geographies ensures that the issue is approached in a holistic manner.


                                                                                                                         18
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Notably, the degree of centralisation or decentralisation of the governance structure needs to be suitable for
      the organisational structure and culture. This entails identifying the appropriate balance between flexibility and
      rigidity to ensure optimal business and process execution. In the case where the business needs to be nimble
      and responsive to changes in operational requirements, it might be more effective to go with a more
      decentralised approach, where AI governance considerations and decisions are made on a more frequent
      basis at the operational level.

      Internal governance structures can also be designed for escalation of ethical issues, where AI systems and
      use cases that are of higher risk are escalated to a governing body with higher authority for review and
      decision-making. One possible example of an internal governance structure with three levels of escalation
      from GSM Association’s (GSMA) AI Ethics Playbook10 is shown below:




      10 GSM Association, “The AI Ethics Playbook” (2022) < https://www.gsma.com/betterfuture/wp-content/uploads/2022/01/The-Mobile-Industry-Ethics-

      Playbook_Feb-2022.pdf >

                                                                                                                                                   19
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Policies and standards for the ethical development of AI can consist of multiple components. An example
      would be a corporate code of conduct that provides guidance on the ethical use of data and AI. In addition, AI
      design principles are established to define and shape AI governance and accountability measures. These
      measures are intended to protect users, uphold societal norms, and ensure compliance with applicable laws
      and regulations.

      Along with the development of AI governance policies and standards, oversight mechanisms also need to be
      put in place to ensure that AI governance guidelines are followed within the deployer’s organisation.

      As the introduction of new internal governance frameworks and structures by the deployer may lead to a
      major shift in the way departments and teams operate, deployers need to have a development plan that
      considers organisational readiness, technical skills, technology, and the need to raise overall awareness of AI
      ethics and governance across the organisation.

      Clarity of roles and responsibilities for personnel involved in the responsible design, development and/or
      deployment of AI is important to ensure that the relevant individuals are aware of their duties. Roles that such
      individuals play include, but are not limited to:

      •     Establishing roles and terms of reference for oversight bodies who undertake governance and review.

      •     Ensuring that the composition of any committee or oversight team is representative of an appropriate
            range of functions such as legal, finance, safety, product, or service functions, etc.

      •     Conducting risk assessments and managing the potential risks of deploying AI systems.

      •     Ensuring that the model training, testing, and selection processes adhere to AI governance criteria set
            out by the central governing body.

      •     Ensuring that AI governance documentation and/or communication artefacts are adequate, maintained
            and updated.

      To effectively implement AI governance, deployers need to ensure that proper guidance and training
      resources are provided to the individuals involved in the governance process and that broader awareness is
      raised across the organisation. Relevant personnel should understand the potential legal and ethical
      considerations for the development and deployment of AI, and their responsibility to safeguard interests of
      users impacted by the AI system’s decisions. They should also be aware of the benefits, risks, and limitations
      of using the AI system and how to interpret the system outputs. This enables them to detect potential harm
      and assess when mitigating actions need to be taken, in line with internal AI governance standards and
      processes.

      As AI technologies are ever-evolving, internal governance structures also need to be periodically reviewed
      and assessed to make sure that they align to the culture and organisational structures of companies and
      satisfy the code of conduct and ethical policies of the companies, while ensuring proper knowledge transfer in
      the event of any changes. Deployers should conduct periodic assessments of the sufficiency and
      effectiveness of the governance model, as well as controls across the AI system lifecycle, from problem
      identification and design to system development and deployment. To ensure that internal governance
      structures keep pace with the developments in the AI space, deployers should also train or improve the
      capacity of personnel involved in the design of such internal governance controls and policies. This could
      include sending personnel for additional training by relevant professional bodies. For example, the Singapore
      Computer Society offers a Certificate in AI Ethics and Governance to help professionals who wish to acquire
      more knowledge in applying ethical AI practices in organisations.


                                                                                                                   20
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      In considering the above recommendations for internal governance structures, developers and deployers
      should also take heed of factors such as the organisation’s size and capabilities. For example, setting up a
      multi-disciplinary, central governing body, may be too onerous for smaller companies without the resources for
      such dedicated use of manpower. Organisations can instead take a more risk-based approach and focus on
      managing the risks that the governance structure seeks to address.




      ABOITIZ GROUP
      Illustration on establishing internal governance structures and measures
      Aboitiz Group recognises that Al and ML algorithms are integral assets of the group, therefore, it is imperative
      to have a strategic Al governance framework to ensure that the algorithms and programs are properly
      managed, to support the day-to-day operations of different strategic business units within the group.

      The Group has established the following internal governance structures and measures for oversight of Al:

      • Ethical considerations related to the use of Al aligned with corporate values

      • Clear and defined roles and responsibilities for the ethical use of Al technology

      • All Al-related processes and decisions must be vetted by the management committee

      • A multi-stakeholder approach with Model Governance Management Committee which is composed of the
        representatives of the strategic business units — the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), Data
        Protection Officer (DPO), Chief Operations Officer, Chief Data Officer, Chief Risk Officer, Chief Technology
        and Operations Officer, Audit, Risk, and Compliance Al, Al and Innovation Center of Excellence, Chief
        Marketing Officer, and Senior Managers (Stakeholders of Al project)




                                                                                                                   21
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      SMART NATION GROUP (SNG), SINGAPORE
      Illustration on internal governance structures and measures - approval gates at different
      stages of LLM product development
      Singapore’s National AI Office (NAIO) established guidelines for product teams in the government building
      custom LLM products, as well as an Al workgroup (with stakeholders from across government) to oversee the
      rigorous testing and safe deployment of products.

      To encourage experimentation while also ensuring ample review of LIM products, product teams need only
      seek approval from the central Al workgroup from the beta testing phase onwards.




           Embarking on internal experiments
                                                             No approval required
           Proof-of-concepts or experiments within
           a development team



                                                             Approval gate 1

           Embarking on beta testing                         Seek approval from the central AI workgroup
                                                             prior to embarking on beta testing.
           With test users outside of the product            To maintain an agile process, teams provide key
           development team                                  product details via a form, and AI workgroup
                                                             members comment/endorse concurrently


                                                             Approval gate 2

           Deploying the product                             Seek central approval from the central AI
                                                             workgroup prior to full deployment. Teams outline
           To all intended users                             key feedback and improvements via a form, and
                                                             AI workgroup members comment/endorse
                                                             concurrently




                                                                                                               22
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      2. Determining the level of human involvement in AI-augmented decision-making




        How severe could the                   How many people are or                  How likely is it for the AI
        potential negative                     could be affected by the                system to cause a
        effects be?                            AI system?                              negative impact?




      AI systems are different from legacy technologies and may pose unfamiliar risks. For example, AI systems’
      processing speeds and decision-making capabilities are quickly outpacing monitoring and validation tools. AI
      systems are also increasingly used in applications where their decisions significantly impact the life of humans
      or business performance. Some other risks related to AI systems include discrimination due to bias, security
      weaknesses, potential for AI system malfunction or unexpected behaviour.

      As a result of the nature of AI systems, they can pose significant risks when things go awry, especially when
      they are used to make significant decisions that can potentially cause harm. A robust risk management
      approach should be taken at every stage of the AI system lifecycle, assessing, and mitigating the risks of AI at
      every stage. Such risks include financial, reputational, ethical, and legal risks among others. This helps build
      trust towards the acceptance and greater use of AI technologies in the region.

      This section is intended to help deployers determine the appropriate extent of human oversight in AI-
      augmented decision-making based on the risks assessed. Risk assessments identify the risks for different
      stakeholders and determine how to address these risks throughout the AI system lifecycle and across the
      entire value chain. To facilitate periodic risk assessments, regardless of the level of human intervention,
      system and user behaviour should be recorded for auditing purposes.

      Having clarity on the objective of using AI is a key first step in determining the extent of human oversight.
      During the design phase of AI systems, deployers should first establish the intended commercial objectives of
      the AI system, ensure that it is compatible with the principles above, and assess it against the potential risks
      of using the AI system for operations. Some objectives can include ensuring consistency in decision-making,
      improving operational efficiency and reducing costs, or introducing new product features to increase
      consumer choice. The above objectives can then be weighed against the risks of deploying the AI system in
      the organisation. This assessment should be guided by corporate values which may reflect the societal norms
      or expectations of the operating region.

      Considering how interconnected the world is now, ASEAN-operated organisations may offer AI services to
      customers and stakeholders who reside and operate outside the region or in culturally distinct areas within the
      region. In diverse regions like Southeast Asia, it is especially important for deployers to consider the unique
      local norms and values in different countries when assessing risks of using AI systems. For example, some
      products or topics may be insensitive and unacceptable in some countries but not others. Companies should
      also take into account the differing levels of digital maturity across ASEAN. When designing, developing, and
      deploying AI, deployers should take into account these considerations and take steps to ensure that the views
      of different cultures are respected.


                                                                                                                     23
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      In some cases, risks may only be presented when a sufficiently large group of people interact with AI. For
      example, if a substantial number of people use the same AI-enabled stock recommendation technology,
      market volatility could be increased due to herding behaviour.

      Core values of the organisation can also be used as a guide to assess the risks and objectives of AI systems.
      Corporate values signify what the company stands for and any AI system that goes against these values is
      likely to warrant a review, with clearly documented rationale for any deviations.

      As new AI systems are introduced and existing models are iterated, the identification of commercial
      objectives, risks and appropriate level of human involvement is a process that needs to be continually
      reviewed and improved. Deployers should continue to identify risks, and review risk management and
      mitigation plans to ensure that there are updated response plans for new risks. Deployers should also keep
      proper documentation of risk impact assessments (refer to Annex A for an example of a risk impact
      assessment template) done, for audit purposes and to instil trust and reassurance for users of AI. Such
      documentation will also be useful when faced with challenges by individuals, organisations, and other
      stakeholders. Other resources like PDPC’s Implementation and Self-Assessment Guide for Organisations11 or
      the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) AI Risk Management Framework Playbook12
      are useful references to understand how to mitigate the risks associated with the use of AI systems.

      To determine the level of risk and the category of human involvement required in AI-augmented decision-
      making, developers and deployers can evaluate AI solutions along two axes – the probability and the severity
      of harm to users and individuals involved in the AI system lifecycle. The definition of “harm” and the
      computation of probability and severity will depend on the context, varying from sector to sector.




                                             High severity                                        High severity
                       Severity of Harm




                                            Low probability                                      High probability



                                              Low severity                                         Low severity

                                            Low probability                                      High probability



                                                                   Probability of Harm




      11 Personal Data Protection Commission Singapore, “Implementation and Self-Assessment Guide for Organisations” (January 2020)

      < https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/-/media/files/pdpc/pdf-files/resource-for-organisation/ai/sgisago.pdf >
      12 National Institute of Standards and Technology, “NIST AI RMF Playbook” < https://airc.nist.gov/AI_RMF_Knowledge_Base/Playbook >


                                                                                                                                           24
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      In computing severity or probability of harm, factors such as how poor system outcomes could impact the lives
      and livelihoods of people, whether the integrity of markets could be compromised, the potential to violate the
      privacy of an individual or the protection of his or her personal data, as well as the durability and reversibility
      of potential harm could be considered.




      Minimal Risk: AI systems that            Medium Risk: Depending on               High Risk: AI systems that have
      have low severity and probability        the nature of the AI system and         high severity of harm and/or high
      of harm are permitted to function        industry it is used in; AI systems      probability of harm should be
      autonomously with minimal human          need to have an appropriate             carefully evaluated and highly
      intervention. However, the AI            level of human control (full            controlled by humans to ensure
      system should still be subject to        control or supervisory control)         that AI systems are not able to
      information and transparency             to ensure that there is oversight       independently make decisions
      obligations and used responsibly.        on AI-augmented decisions.              with unintended or dangerous
                                                                                       outcomes.




      In addition, other factors that deployers in various contexts may consider relevant, could include: (a) the
      nature of harm (i.e., whether the harm is physical or intangible in nature); (b) the reversibility of harm, and as a
      corollary to this, the ability for individuals to obtain recourse; and (c) whether it is operationally feasible or
      meaningful for a human to be involved in a decision-making process (e.g., having a human-in-the-loop would
      be unfeasible in high speed financial trading, and be impractical in the case of driverless vehicles).

      Harm also needs to be assessed according to the objective of AI and the nature of the industry in which it is
      used. For example, an AI system that is used in a healthcare setting to aid diagnosis or provide care for
      patients is likely to have a lower threshold for severity as compared to a recommendation system that is used
      to recommend products on an ecommerce website. ASEAN governments should also ensure that their
      understanding of harm is updated and in line with technological advancements.

      In general, AI systems that have high severity and probability of harm should adopt a human-in-the-loop
      approach where humans can assume full control of the system and decide when it is safe to execute
      decisions. These assessments should be made for all user types and deployers are encouraged to give
      special consideration to impact on vulnerable and/or marginalised populations.

      Based on the risk assessment of AI systems, there can be three broad categories of human involvement in AI-
      augmented decision-making – human-in-the-loop, human-over-the-loop, and human-out-of-the-loop.

      • Human-in-the-loop: AI system only provides recommendations that humans use as an input to make
        decisions. Humans have full control over decision-making and AI can only provide supporting information.




                                                                                                                       25
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




             For example, in the case where AI is used to predict medical conditions in patients, doctors or medical
             professionals are ultimately the ones that perform the diagnosis and dispense the appropriate
             treatments. With human-in-the-loop, humans need to have enough understanding of the factors
             influencing the AI system’s decision and how it makes its decision in order to determine if the
             recommendation, prediction, or decision is accurate, fair, and/or safe. The human should take the time
             and effort to make such an assessment rather than simply accepting the AI system’s response for
             efficiency’s sake. Deployers should also be cautious of the risk of automation bias (aka “rubber stamping
             risk”) where the human gets used to approving the AI system’s outputs because of its high accuracy and
             misses the occasional AI error due to “muscle memory” where he/she becomes used to clicking on
             “approve”.

      •      Another factor to consider is the significance of the AI system’s outputs to the human making the
             decision i.e., whether the AI system’s outputs is the sole input to the decision (extremely significant) or
             one of a dozen inputs (less significant).

      •      Human-over-the-loop: Humans play a supervisory and monitoring role and can intervene in the
             decisions of the AI system when it does not behave as intended, encounters unexpected events, or
             presents potential harm to humans. For example, even in the “full self-driving” mode of some
             autonomous vehicles, humans still need to have their hands on the wheel and eyes on the road so they
             can take over immediately if needed13. As supervisors of AI, humans can also alter the parameters
             during the operation of AI.

      •      Human-out-of-the-loop: AI system has complete control over the execution of decisions and does not
             need to rely on human intervention. The AI system has full control without the option of human override.
             For example, recommendation algorithms are able to autonomously push products and/or services to
             users based on their usage patterns and behavioural profiles, all without a human screening and
             approving its decisions.




      EY
      Illustration on determining the level of human involvement in Al-augmented decision-making
      EY’s purpose is building a better working world, and as a leader in Artificial Intelligence, this means that EY is
      committed to developing and deploying trusted Al solutions both internally and for its clients.

      EY adopts an Al Model Risk Tiering approach to assess and classify the models as High, Medium, or Low
      risk. The key areas of risks associated with Al, such as use case design, ethics, data, privacy, algorithmic,
      performance, compliance, technology, and business risks are evaluated to assign a risk tier for every Al
      model. Based on the risk tier, appropriate monitoring and human oversight is put in place for the Al models.




      13 NPR, “Cars are getting better at driving themselves, but you still can’t sit back and nap” (22 December 2021)

      < https://www.npr.org/2021/12/22/1064598337/cars-are-getting-better-at-driving-themselves-but-you-still-cant-sit-back-and-na >

                                                                                                                                       26
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      SMART NATION GROUP (SNG), SINGAPORE
      Illustration on determining the level of human involvement in Al-augmented decision-making
      – determining the level of risk and corresponding mitigating measures of LLM use cases
      Singapore’s National AI Office (NAIO) established guidelines for product teams in the government building
      custom LLM products, as well as an Al workgroup (with stakeholders from across government) to oversee the
      rigorous testing and safe deployment of products.

      NAIO takes a risk-based approach when advising product teams on required mitigating measures. The level
      of risk varies, depending on Al products':

      I. Task (productivity and language tools VS factual information retrieval) [lower risk VS higher risk]

      II. Audience (internal-facing VS external-facing) [lower risk VS higher risk]

      For example, for public-facing Al products, the product should be made robust to adversarial attack. The
      corresponding mitigating measures include the product teams engaging in efforts to increase the robustness
      of their products, such as via robustness tests to improve performance against adversarial prompts, red
      teaming or bug-bounty programmes, and rate-limiting queries so users are deterred from brute-force attacks.




      3. Operations management


      The AI System Lifecycle consists of the following stages:



               Project governance
                                                       Data Collection
               and problem                                                                     Modelling
                                                       and Processing
               statement definition




                                                       Deployment
               Outcome analysis
                                                       and Monitoring




      Developers and deployers should bear in mind that the system lifecycle is not always unidirectional and can
      be a continuous iterative process of fine-tuning AI systems that have already been developed and deployed.




                                                                                                               27
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                   AI System
                                                   Lifecycle




      The subsequent sections cover the key areas that need to be considered in each stage of the AI System
      Lifecycle. There are also examples of questions that teams should ask as they go through each stage
      included in speech bubbles ( ) throughout the section.


      Project governance and problem statement definition



       What is the business        What are the actions        Does the use of the         Will AI actually
       driver(s) for the AI        that will be                AI agent align with         improve the problem,
       system?                     autonomously                the organisation’s          or cause new ones?
                                   performed by the AI         code of conduct and
                                   agent?                      ethical policies?




      AI governance should be built into AI systems by design. In this phase of the AI system lifecycle, deployers
      should ensure that business purpose, governance and key stakeholders are properly identified and aligned. AI
      systems should be designed, developed, and deployed in response to organisational needs and aligned with




                                                                                                                28
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      business strategies and goals. There should be conversations about the purpose, range, and portfolio for
      which the AI system is designed, developed, deployed, as well as how it might impact users, considering the
      degree of human oversight. When designing and developing AI systems, deployers and developers also need
      to bear in mind the principles of human-centricity, fairness and equity, transparency and explainability, safety
      and security, robustness and reliability, accountability and integrity, and privacy and data governance.

      Deployers should conduct risk-based assessments of the AI systems before starting any data collection and
      processing or modelling. Risk assessments will help deployers identify potential safety risks of foreseeable
      uses of the AI system, including the potential for accidental or malicious misuse, and create a plan to assess
      and mitigate these risks. Measures and safeguards for risk mitigation should be properly documented
      because it allows organisations to keep a record of the responsible design behind the development and
      deployment of the AI system as well as the justifiability of outcomes.

      According to the risks assessed, deployers should put in place mitigation measures to manage the risks
      relating to the AI system. Some measures include adopting an appropriate level of human involvement to
      oversee the AI system’s decision-making process, regular monitoring and maintenance, developing
      procedures to respond to previously unknown risks, and implementing mechanisms for the AI system to safely
      disengage itself in the event of potential harm.

      Attention should also be paid to the potential environmental impact of the use of the AI system. In terms of
      measuring environmental impact, one way to do so is by estimating energy consumption throughout the
      design, development, and deployment process. Developers and deployers should ensure that energy
      consumption levels are within the appropriate range and take actions to reduce energy consumption where
      needed.

      If the AI system or part of it is designed, developed, or deployed using a third-party developer or vendor,
      deployers should take actions to resolve or mitigate any non-compliance.

      Before progressing further, roles and responsibilities for the design, development, and deployment of the AI
      system in a trusted and responsible manner need to be clearly defined and developed with the accompanying
      accountability mechanisms. Stakeholders who are involved in the development, review and/or approval of the
      problem definition and requirements of the AI system should be aware of the roles they play and be
      adequately equipped with the skills, knowledge and tools needed to carry out their duties.




                                                                                                                   29
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Data collection and processing


                                                             Is there a risk that the
       What is the source of                                                                                        Is personally identifiable or
                                                             training data may not be
       training and validation data                                                                                 sensitive data used to
                                                             representative of the
       used to train the AI system?                                                                                 make decisions or
                                                             population for one or more
                                                                                                                    generate output?
                                                             meaningful attributes?




        Are there the necessary
        permission/approvals/                                                                                       What is the amount of data
        consent or lawful basis to                           Is a data protection impact
                                                                                                                    being used and the
        use the data, especially for                         assessment required? If
                                                                                                                    duration that it is being
        personal data, and even                              yes, has it been done?
                                                                                                                    held?
        more critically for third-party
        sourced data?




      An AI system is only as good as the data used to develop it. Accordingly, data used for model training, testing,
      and validation should be sufficiently representative to mitigate risks of unjust bias. This can be done through
      constant monitoring of datasets used and variable performance of the model across different target population
      sub-groups. If developers are supplying AI systems to deployers, they should provide appropriate disclosure
      or supporting documentation that summarises the types of data used to train the AI system, and how they
      have managed potential bias. Types of bias that developers and deployers should look out for include:

      • Representation bias – where training datasets poorly represent the real-world population the AI system
        intends to serve.

      • Societal bias – where human biases and inherent cognitive biases are reflected in the behaviour of the AI
        systems.

      • Labelling bias – where the process of labelling the training dataset can involve subjective decisions that
        can be a vector for introducing human biases into the AI system.

      • Measurement bias – where features and labels are proxies for desired quantities, potentially leaving out
        important factors that affect the AI system’s performance.14

      • Activity bias – where AI systems get their training data only from their most active users and exclude those
        less active.15

      • Proxy bias – where data directly relating to protected characteristics (e.g., race) are not used in the dataset,
        but other present data features with a correlation to such protected characteristics result in biases in the
        dataset.




      14 National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Towards a Standard for Identifying and Managing Bias in Artificial Intelligence” (March 2022)

      < https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.1270.pdf >
      15 National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Towards a Standard for Identifying and Managing Bias in Artificial Intelligence” (March 2022)

      < https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.1270.pdf >

                                                                                                                                                          30
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      AI systems trained on biased datasets could be less effective in performing their role and could even make
      unfair decisions or recommendations that may harm or prejudice users or individuals impacted by the
      decision. This could in turn lead to reputational harm or even legal liabilities for the organisation as well as a
      broader loss of societal trust in AI.

      To mitigate the risks involved with the presence of existing bias in the datasets, developers and deployers
      should adopt the use of heterogenous and/or representative datasets, where data is gathered from various
      reliable sources. Developers and deployers must reasonably avoid the use of protected characteristics like
      gender, ethnicity, etc., in AI systems to drive decisions, but are encouraged to use them to assess AI system
      outcomes for unjust bias. Developers and deployers should also ensure that AI systems are trained on
      enough data relevant to their language(s), region, and industries. During data processing, developers and
      deployers should also try to avoid premature removal of data attributes that could help identify inherent bias
      and consider assigned roles for assessing and/or detecting bias in the processing pipeline for accountability.
      To mitigate the potential of labelling bias, the personnel responsible for labelling the data should be provided
      with clear guidelines to establish an objective and repeatable process for individual labelling decisions. In
      certain domains where the risk of labelling bias is high, labellers should also have adequate subject matter
      expertise and be provided training to recognise potential unconscious biases. A quality assurance mechanism
      can also be set up to monitor label quality.

      Using different datasets for model training, testing and validation can also help developers check for
      systematic bias in AI systems. After the AI system is trained, it can be tested using data from different
      demographic groups. Deployers should regularly evaluate AI systems for bias and take steps to minimise
      cases where particular groups are systematically disadvantaged or advantaged by the AI system’s output and
      make corrections when such cases are observed. One example of fairness testing is provided in AI Verify’s
      Testing Framework16 where fairness assessment includes technical tests to check whether an AI system
      produces different outcomes across different demographic groups or sensitive attributes such as gender or
      race. The AI system can also be validated with a validation dataset for further checks of bias.

      Even after the AI system has been developed and deployed, it is important that deployers continue to review
      the system, datasets, and model metrics (e.g., data drift, precision, recall, bias, fairness) periodically and
      make reasonable effort to ensure the accuracy, relevance, and reliability of the data and outcomes. The data
      used for system development and testing should be similar to the data the AI system faces in the live
      production environment. Over time, data drift may occur, where the distribution of input data during the live
      production environment changes, leading to system performance degradation. Where the dataset is found to
      be outdated, new data obtained from the system during production can be used as new input data for model
      iteration. When the AI system has a continuous learning loop where system outputs during production is fed
      back to the model(s) as training and testing data, reinforcement bias might be introduced since the training
      data has gone through the system once and will carry any inherent biases the system has. Deployers who
      employ AI systems that utilise continuous learning loops should carefully evaluate the appropriateness of
      using system outputs as new training and testing data and take measures to mitigate any bias identified.

      Other good data governance and management practices that will help the deployers ensure quality data for
      model training include maintaining a data provenance record and putting in place data quality measures. A
      data provenance record documents the end-to-end data lineage – where the data originally came from and
      how it was changed throughout its lifecycle. Knowing where the data originally came from, how it was



      16 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Singapore’s A.I. Verify builds trust through transparency” (16 August 2022)

      < https://oecd.ai/en/wonk/singapore-ai-verify >

                                                                                                                                                31
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      collected and how it was processed will help developers and deployers understand how data accuracy and
      integrity is maintained over its lifecycle. It is also worthwhile noting that providing such information would also
      likely be material for fulfilling the consent and notice requirements under various data protection and privacy
      laws in ASEAN. Deployers may look at the data from its end-use and backdate it to its source or start from the
      data’s source and follow its journey through to its end-use. For a more complete view, deployers may also
      choose to look at the end-to-end data lineage – starting from both the data’s source and its end use. When
      data is obtained from a third-party provider, it can be difficult to establish its true origin. In this case, it is
      advisable for deployers to carefully assess the feasibility and risks of using that data before proceeding
      further. Where AI systems are not developed in-house, deployers will need to work with developers for such
      assessments.
      Developers and deployers may reference the relevant ISO standards for data robustness, quality, and other
      data governance practices. One example is the ISO 2700 Series, which is a series of standards that provides
      guidelines for the protection of personal data in the cloud.

      Developers should also pay attention to data quality throughout the system lifecycle. There are a few factors
      that may affect data quality and some examples include:




      Accuracy: How well the          Completeness: Whether the dataset can              Credibility: Whether the data
      values in the datasets          represent the entirety of the entities             originated from a reliable
      match true characteristics      described by the dataset, both in terms of         source and whether its
      of the entities described       attributes and items, and whether it is            veracity can be ascertained.
      by the dataset.                 relevant to the problem statement or scope
                                      of coverage of the AI system.




      Relevance and representativeness: Whether                     Human interactions: Tracking how the data has
      the data fits the context of the data collection and          been edited or amended by humans, and whether
      objective of the AI system and is accurately                  such amendments or edits are material to the
      reflective of real-world demographics that the AI             usefulness and/or accuracy of the data.
      system will be exposed to.




                                                                                                                      32
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Good data governance practices are a key factor in ensuring data quality. These include:




      Documentation: Ensuring             Data Lineage: Ensure that data can be followed across its lifecycle, from
      that documentation of data          its source to its current target. This involves tracking every transformation
      sources, data transformations,      step and link between data points to provide a clear understanding of how
      and data processing steps are       data evolves. One way of doing this is by keeping a data provenance
      kept up to date.                    record, which allows an organisation to ascertain the quality of the data
                                          based on its origin and subsequent transformation, trace potential sources
                                          of errors, update data, and attribute data to their sources.




      Data storage: Define storage standards (data formats,        Data security and privacy: Implement measures
      structures, locations, etc.) to ensure consistency of        (e.g., encryption, access controls, anonymisation,
      data storage. Data retention policies also need to be        etc.) to secure and protect data from
      defined to ensure that data is stored for the                unauthorised access and comply with privacy and
      appropriate length of time and disposed according to         data protection regulations.
      the appropriate procedures.




      When sourcing and processing data for AI development, developers should assess if a data protection impact
      assessment is needed and ensure that the data sourced for analytics is not used in a manner incompatible
      with its intended use or that data has not been improperly disclosed. Personal data should only be collected in
      accordance with applicable privacy and data protection policies of the organisation and applicable legal
      requirements of the country of operation. In the data processing phase, it is important that model development
      datasets have been reviewed to minimise use of potentially sensitive or personal data. Anonymised data
      should be used where possible and if it does not compromise on model quality. In the event that developers
      and deployers obtain personal data from third party sources, there should be appropriate due diligence to
      check and ensure that the third-party source is authorised to collect and disclose personal data on behalf of
      the individual, or that the source had obtained the necessary consent for disclosure of the personal data.

      To minimise impact on the environment, developers and deployers should also make sure that the amount of
      data being held and the duration it is being held for is kept to a minimum to reduce data centres’ energy
      requirements.




                                                                                                                    33
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      UCARE.AI
      Illustration on operations management - documenting data lineage, ensuring data quality and
      mitigating bias
      UCARE.AI is a Singapore-based deep-tech start-up, with a proprietary award-winning online ML and Al
      platform built on a cloud-based microservices architecture that provides real-time predictive insights, which
      can be applied to the healthcare sector and beyond.

      UCARE.AI logged data consistently across multiple components and collected data in a secure and
      centralised log storage. In ensuring data quality, the company was also careful to transform its data into a
      usable format so that the properly formatted data could be used to build Al models. The company also
      prioritised creating Al models that were unique to clients, obtaining reliable datasets from the client to build
      models instead of using third-party datasets. Such a practice provided distinctions between patients' profiles
      and the features selected for each Al model differed for each hospital, contributing to greater accuracy in the
      bill estimations for patients. Another pertinent part of Al model development was minimising the risk of bias.
      For this, the objective and consistent machine predictions gave patients customised, data-driven predictions
      of their hospital bills instead of those subjected to human biases in algorithm development.




      Modelling



        Does a regulator require               Does the AI system                      Is there proper
        that the organisation can              produce repeatable and                  documentation to track the
        explain how the AI system              reproducible results?                   AI model training and
        arrived at its outcomes?                                                       selection process?




       During the system development process, developers should assess the approach and evaluate if AI systems
       are explainable, repeatable, reproducible, and robust. With the complexity of AI systems, it may not always be
       feasible to achieve all the above. Developers should adopt a risk-based approach to identify which model
       attributes are more relevant and necessary. There are two areas to consider in the risk-based approach –
       which features or functions of the model(s) in the AI system have the greatest impact on the users and which
       measures are likely to help establish more trust with users.




                                                                                                                    34
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                 Explainability

                 Explainability is about explaining how AI systems function and how they arrive at certain decisions.
                 To build trust in AI, it is important that humans understand how AI systems make predictions.
                 However, in some cases such as “black box” models, it can be difficult to explain a model.
                 Nonetheless, developers and deployers of AI systems containing such models can still work towards
                 explainability by explaining how the predictions of AI system are used in the whole decision-making
                 process. Explainability practices that developers and deployers can adopt when developing and
                 deploying AI systems include:

                 •       Auditability refers to the readiness of an AI system to undergo an assessment of its algorithms,
                         data, and design processes. Ensuring proper documentation of the training and selection
                         processes of the AI system, reasons for certain decisions made and measures taken to mitigate
                         any risks found during the risk assessments will help developers keep track and remain
                         accountable for the decisions made during the AI deployment process. Some developers may
                         employ the use of automated machine learning which automates some or all the steps in the AI
                         system lifecycle, such as feature engineering and hyperparameter tuning. Even for the steps
                         that are automatically performed by automated machine learning, developers are encouraged
                         to still consider how to incorporate transparency and explainability in such automated
                         workflows. For example, documenting the data sources, hyperparameters, algorithms, and
                         optimisation techniques initially selected by developers can help developers and deployers
                         better understand how changes to these input parameters can potentially alter the machine
                         learning outcomes.

                 •       Where “black box” models are deployed, rendering it difficult, if not impossible to provide
                         explanations as to the workings of the AI systems, outcome-based explanations, with a focus
                         on explaining the impact of decision-making or results flowing from the AI systems may be
                         relied on. Another method that can be considered is AI Model Cards, which are short
                         documents accompanying trained machine learning models that disclose the context in which
                         models are intended to be used, details of the performance evaluation procedures, and other
                         relevant information17.

                 •       Deployers may also consider focusing on alternative aspects of the quality of the AI system or
                         preparing information that could help demonstrate and justify the outcomes of an AI system’s
                         processing behaviour (e.g., documenting the repeatability of results produced by the AI
                         system). If need be, they can work with developers to develop such information. Some
                         practices to demonstrate repeatability include conducting repeatability assessments to ensure
                         deployments in live environments are repeatable and performing counterfactual fairness testing
                         to ensure that the AI system’s decisions are the same in both the real world and in the
                         counterfactual world.

                 •       For AI-enabled products and devices, it is advisable for developers and deployers to include
                         descriptions of the expected behaviour of the AI into accompanying technical specifications or
                         product documentation. Such descriptions can include the rationale behind why certain features
                         or models were selected during the AI system development process. Provision of such



      17 OECD.AI Policy Observatory, “Catalogue of Tools & Metrics for Trustworthy AI” (15 September 2022) < https://oecd.ai/en/catalogue/tools/model-

      cards >

                                                                                                                                                         35
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                         information helps deployers remain accountable to individuals and/or regulators and helps AI
                         systems become more explainable and transparent. As far as possible, deployers that do not
                         develop in-house AI systems and procure them from developers should appropriately govern
                         their relationships with these developers through contracts that allocate liability in a manner
                         agreed between parties. Deployers can consider including an obligation for developers to help
                         support them in meeting transparency and explainability needs in the contractual terms. This
                         could help deployers obtain the necessary support from third-party developers on retrieving or
                         understanding the relevant information about how the AI system functions and its expected
                         behaviour. An example of information that deployers can obtain from third-party developers
                         would be AI Model Cards, which provide details on how the AI model functions, model
                         development and testing process, and limitations of the model. Some examples of AI Model
                         Cards can be referenced from Google’s Face Detection Model Card18 and Salesforce’s Einstein
                         Optical Character Recognition (OCR) Model Card19.

                       • Deployers can also collaborate with developers to conduct joint audits and assessments for
                         transparency and explainability.

                       • Deployers can also use explainability tools to evaluate the quality of their explanations. Some
                         examples of such tools include AI Verify’s Toolkit20, OmniXAI21, AIX360, Shapley Additive
                         Explanations (SHAP)22, and Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME)23. It
                         should be noted that most of the tools mentioned provide technical (explicit) explanation and
                         are meant to be used by technical users (i.e., data scientists).

                  Even with the use of tools to explain AI systems, it may be difficult for the layman, and even experts,
                  to understand exactly how AI systems work. In these cases, deployers can consider using implicit
                  explanations of AI instead. For example, deployers could use comparisons such as “users with
                  similar profiles as you were recommended these similar products” to help users understand to some
                  degree how the AI system uses other users’ data and their purchase history to recommend products
                  to them. Counterfactuals may also be a useful means to explain how changes in variables or data
                  affect outcomes of AI systems. For example, informing users that “you would have been approved if
                  your average debt was 15% lower”.

                  Although explainability is generally encouraged to promote transparency and build trust in AI
                  systems, there may be situations where it does not make sense to disclose important information
                  about how AI systems function. For example, the workings of fraud detection AI systems need to
                  remain confidential to the organisation so that bad actors are not able to circumvent them. There also
                  needs to be an appropriate balance between transparency and ensuring that companies’ Intellectual
                  Property (IP) is protected. Certain algorithms may be essential to business operations and bottom
                  line, such as trading algorithms for robo-advisors, and disclosing such information will put confidential
                  or proprietary business information at stake.


      18 Google, “Face Detection Model Card v0” < https://modelcards.withgoogle.com/face-detection >

      19 Salesforce, “Salesforce Einstein Model Cards” < https://resources.docs.salesforce.com/latest/latest/en-us/sfdc/pdf/salesforce_ai_model_cards.pdf>

      20 Infocomm Media Development Authority, “Fact Sheet – Open-sourcing of AI Verify and set up of AI Verify Foundation” (2023)

      < https://www.imda.gov.sg/-/media/imda/files/news-and-events/media-room/media-releases/2023/06/7-jun---ai-annoucements---annex-a.pdf >
      21 Salesforce, “Welcome to OmniXAI’s documentation!” (2022) < https://opensource.salesforce.com/OmniXAI/latest/index.html >

      22 SHAP, “Welcome to the SHAP documentation” (2018) < https://shap.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ >

      23 C3.ai, “What is Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations (LIME)” < https://c3.ai/glossary/data-science/lime-local-interpretable-model-

      agnostic-explanations/#:~:text=What%20is%20Local%20Interpretable%20Model,to%20explain%20each%20individual%20prediction. >

                                                                                                                                                         36
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      UCARE.AI
      Illustration on explainability in the model lifecycle
      UCARE.AI deployed its Al-Powered Cost Predictor (AlgoExpectTM) in Parkway's four Singapore hospitals to
      provide dynamic real-time predictions of bill size at pre-admission at 82% accuracy.

      UCARE.AI has incorporated explainability directly into the Al Cost Predictor model. Along with providing
      prediction, it is also able to tell on demand what are the important features that contribute to each prediction
      result. Client applications consuming the model's prediction service are also able to ask the model to "explain"
      each prediction result without going through UCARE.AI's support team. This helps users to understand the
      model predictions and provides greater transparency for the model's performance and instils greater trust.

      The shared professional trust and respect between UCARE.AI and its clients in turn helped to build the
      recognition of the company as a reliable and trusted partner in data management and developer of Al models.




               Robustness

               Robustness helps establish trust in the performance of AI systems, especially in unpredictable
               circumstances. Robustness refers to the ability of the AI system to still function as intended or in a
               safe manner in the face of errors during execution or erroneous input. It can be measured by the
               extent to which the AI system can function correctly with invalid input or environmental stress.
               Robustness is an especially important attribute for building trust with users as it shows that the AI
               system can withstand a range of input environments.

               AI systems are only as good as the data used to train and test them. It is difficult for the AI system to
               be trained on every possible precondition and scenario that it will face, especially when it is deployed
               in the real-world with dynamic human interactions. When faced with an unfamiliar input, the system
               might produce insensible or unintended outputs.

               Developers and/or deployers can assess robustness by testing the AI system on various foreseeable
               erroneous input and scenarios. This can be done via adversarial testing, which is a series of tests to
               expose the system to a broad range of unexpected inputs and mitigate any unintended behaviour
               before the deployment of the AI system in live environments.

               Even with the use of adversarial testing, AI systems are not immune to changes in inputs and
               operation environments that occur over time. To address this, some deployers or developers may
               choose to adopt continuous learning practices, where the learned parameters of the AI system are
               not fixed and can continue to change as the AI system is deployed in the live environment and learns
               from data it receives. However, it is still important for deployers to closely monitor the AI system and
               ensure that it does not learn unintended behaviour in the process.




                                                                                                                     37
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Outcome analysis



        How does the organisation                      How does the performance of the AI
        determine if the AI system developed           system compare to industry
        is fit-for-purpose?                            standards?




      After the design and development process, deployers need to confirm that the AI system’s outcomes are fit for
      purpose, achieve the desired level of precision and consistency, and are aligned with ethical, lawful, and fair
      design criteria.

      During the project governance and problem statement definition phase, deployers should have clearly
      documented the intended purpose of the AI system and assessed that the risks associated with the AI system
      will be mitigated with appropriate measures. Risk identification and analysis are also necessary to address the
      root cause of the risks encountered.

      In the outcome analysis phase, business stakeholders should be involved to observe the performance of the
      AI system and validate that it fulfils the purposes laid out at the start. Organisations can also consider
      conducting acceptance tests, which may cover functional and non-functional aspects, including security and
      performance evaluations. In some cases, developers and deployers may also choose to compare the actual
      Return on Investment (ROI) of the AI system against the planned ROI that was estimated during the planning
      phase.

      To facilitate the outcome analysis process, it is important to establish a clear communication channel between
      the technical team and other stakeholders to ensure mutual understanding of AI system performance and
      potential improvements.

      Fairness testing should also be conducted at this stage to ensure that the AI system does not make decisions
      that can result in unintended discrimination of certain demographics of users.




      UCARE.AI
      Illustration on operations management – robust model testing before deployment
      UCARE.AI deployed its Al-Powered Cost Predictor (AlgoExpectTM) in Parkway's four Singapore hospitals to
      provide dynamic real-time predictions of bill size at pre-admission at 82% accuracy.

      UCARE.AI worked with its clients to create a validation framework to strengthen the Al model's accuracy,
      making sure to obtain patients' feedback on the framework for further fine-tuning. The Cost Predictor's Al
      model then underwent User Acceptance Testing, where the end business users from each hospital were
      invited to test the solution and provide feedback on various predictions.


                                                                                                                  38
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      GOJEK
      Illustration on operations management - conducting outcome analysis for Al models
      Gojek is an Indonesian on-demand multi-service platform and digital payment group based in Jakarta. In order
      to provide a pleasant and efficient experience to all actors of the platform, Gojek leverages Al in various
      sectors, including, but not limited to, driver-order matching, cartography and fraud detection.

      Before deployment of machine learning models, Gojek tests the models' performance metrics against a set of
      predefined offline benchmarks. Such benchmarks allow evaluation of the Al model's performance in a
      controlled environment with a fixed set of data, which helps Gojek measure the variation in model outputs for
      successive iterations under the same operating conditions. Conducting offline benchmarking also allows
      Gojek to test model performance without any real-world risk or harm to end users.




      Deployment and Monitoring



        How critical is it if the AI system’s         Would the failure of the AI system
        malfunction is not monitored or               (unexpected or corrupted results)
        reported?                                     raise concern over any areas?




      Deployers need to ensure that AI systems are scalable and deployable with the right technical infrastructure.
      Mechanisms should be established to measure the processing power use of all AI systems in deployment to
      ensure that there is enough processing power to run all the AI systems deployed by the organisation and that
      energy consumption is sustainable and within expectations. Measures should also be put in place to ensure
      that the underlying architecture is secure and resilient, so that AI operations would not be interrupted by
      adverse events.

      To ensure ease of maintenance of AI systems, deployers can also maintain a system and technology
      inventory that keeps a record of programming languages, software packages, third-party vendor programs
      and hardware that have been reviewed and approved for use.

      Deployers should set up mechanisms to monitor the AI system’s performance, for example, by establishing
      monitoring and reporting systems as well as processes to ensure that the appropriate level of management is
      aware of the performance and other issues relating to the deployed AI system. The scope, frequency, and
      timeliness of monitoring activities, as well as the relevant follow-up actions, and definition of metrics and
      thresholds required by the supporting teams to flag any errors should be defined.



                                                                                                                 39
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Where appropriate, monitoring of deployed AI systems can include autonomous monitoring to effectively scale
      human oversight. AI systems can be designed to report on the confidence level of their predictions, and
      explainability features can focus on why the AI system had a certain level of confidence.

      As part of monitoring, it is also good practice to revalidate the AI system for early detection of
      underperformance. Technical interventions like continuous system monitoring for performance drift issues can
      also be implemented. To ensure safety, testing or revalidation may also need to assess the degree to which
      an AI system generalises well and fails gracefully.

      In cases where the performance of the AI system is found to have dropped over time, regular tuning of the
      models in the AI system is a measure that allows developers and deployers to keep AI systems relevant and
      up to date. Developers and deployers should have internal policies and processes to mandate regular model
      tuning, allowing them to iterate models based on updated training and testing datasets. These new datasets
      should incorporate new data from the production environment, to more accurately reflect the deployment
      environment that the AI system operates in. Regular tuning may also be necessary in cases where
      commercial objectives and risks change. For example, the function and scope of an AI-powered chatbot may
      change according to consumers’ preferences and needs.

      After tuning the models in the AI system, it is also important that developers and deployers continue to test the
      AI system in environments that best reflect the dynamism of the live environment. This ensures that the AI
      system does not just learn from regularities in the environment but is able to perform as intended when faced
      with dynamic inputs.




      UCARE.AI
      Illustration on operations management – continuous monitoring of deployed Al models
      UCARE.AI deployed its Al-Powered Cost Predictor (AlgoExpectTM) in Parkway's four Singapore hospitals to
      provide dynamic real-time predictions of bill size at pre-admission at 82% accuracy.

      After the deployment of the Cost Predictor, UCARE.AI continuously monitored and iterated the algorithm,
      improving the data and simplifying the process for better accuracy. This continual training of the Al models
      ensured that the algorithms remained up-to-date and functioned with more precision after each data input.




      EY
      Illustration on operations management – continuous monitoring of deployed Al models
      EY’s purpose is building a better working world, and as a leader in Artificial Intelligence, this means that EY is
      committed to developing and deploying trusted Al solutions both internally and for its clients.

      EY bears in mind that it can be a continuous process of fine-tuning models, even after they have been
      deployed. Leveraging EY Fabric capabilities, deployed models can be monitored to ascertain the performance
      and need for corrective action over its full life cycle. Each model's input data, output data and reference data
      are monitored to determine if any corrective measures to re-train or re-develop the model are needed.

                                                                                                                     40
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      4. Stakeholder interaction and communication


      It is important that appropriate steps are taken to develop trust with stakeholders throughout the design,
      development, and deployment of AI.

      In line with the principle of transparency, deployers should consider providing general disclosure of when AI is
      used in their product and/or service offerings, information such as the type of AI system used, the intended
      purpose of the AI system and how the AI system affects the decision-making process in relation to users. One
      example is the use of chatbots on websites – deployers should inform users that the answers are provided by
      an AI-powered algorithm, and they are not interacting directly with human customer service agents.

      Where applicable, deployers may also consider putting a disclaimer that any inputs made to a chatbot or any
      AI-powered application will be used as additional data to improve or train the AI system in order to give data
      awareness to the user. This, however, needs to be coupled with a risk-based approach as bad actors may use
      this opportunity to skew the learning of the AI system if they know that such data might be used for continuous
      learning of the AI system.

      The deployment of AI systems might cause a major shift in the roles and responsibilities of certain individuals
      in the company. For example, some employees may find that some aspects of their jobs are now being
      augmented or made redundant by AI-enabled technologies. Deployers need to be sensitive about the change
      management aspect of AI system deployment and make sure that there is adequate communication with
      employees to help them understand the AI system deployed and how it changes previous workflows.

      To help employees adapt to an AI-augmented work environment, deployers should also look into wider
      awareness raising, providing training and education opportunities for employees to understand how to work
      with AI systems and how much benefit it brings. They should also try to redesign existing jobs so that AI
      augments existing skillsets of workers rather than renders them redundant24.

      As communication needs differ for different types of stakeholders, deployers can consider developing a
      standardised policy that dictates what level of information, who to provide the information and how to provide
      the information to stakeholders. This ensures that there is consistency and common understanding across the
      organisation on stakeholder communication. As deployers set out to develop such policies, they can first start
      by identifying the target audience and the purpose and context of interaction – for example, if they are internal
      or external stakeholders and what role they play in the AI system lifecycle. In the case where the target
      audience are users of AI systems, deployers can consider providing information related to the needs of the
      user as they navigate the interaction with the system, such as being informed whether AI is used and
      understanding how the AI system is expected to behave in normal circumstances. In the case where decisions
      made by the AI system will affect users, developers and deployers should provide more specific and detailed
      information relating to how the AI system arrives at a decision and how users will be affected by the decisions
      that the AI system makes.

      Deployers should also put in place feedback mechanisms for users and other stakeholders to give feedback
      on the performance and output of the AI system. This will allow deployers to make iterative adjustments to the
      AI system to ensure it continues to perform as intended. Feedback channels and mechanisms for managing
      communications with aggrieved individuals should also be implemented and adapted to assist individuals who
      have queries or concerns about the impact of decisions or outcomes made by AI systems.


      24 For further guidance, organisations may wish to refer to Singapore’s Personal Data Protection Commission, “A Guide to Job Redesign in the Age of

      AI” (2020) < https://file.go.gov.sg/ai-guide-to-jobredesign.pdf >
                                                                                                                                                      41
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Some examples of feedback mechanisms include:




      Feedback channels                                           Decision review channels

      Channels that could be used for users to raise              Avenues for individuals to request a review of AI
      feedback or queries. Where users find                       system’s decisions that have materially affected
      inaccuracies in their personal data which has               them. Where the effect of a fully autonomous
      been used for AI-augmented decisions affecting              decision on a user may have significant impact, it
      them, such channels can also allow them to                  would be reasonable to provide an opportunity for
      correct their data. Such channels can be                    the decision to be reviewed by a human.
      managed by the Data Protection Officer or Quality
      Service Manager where appropriate.



      Where feasible and practical, deployers can also consider if users should be given the choice to opt out of the
      AI-enabled service and if yes, how this option can be exercised by the users. In the case where users are not
      given a choice to opt out, deployers should implement processes to engage with and obtain feedback from
      users or individuals impacted by the output of the AI system. Some factors that deployers can consider in
      determining whether users should be given the choice to opt out include:



             Degree of risk/harm to the individuals                       Reversibility of the decision made


             Availability of alternative decision-making                  Complexity and inefficiency of maintaining
             mechanisms                                                   parallel systems


             Technical feasibility


      Sometimes, the AI system is required to learn from real-life input data (i.e., training the AI system based on
      user inputs). Before making use of users’ data for AI system development, deployers are encouraged to
      inform users that their data will be used for subsequent model training so that users can understand and,
      where required, provide informed consent to how their data will be used. Since data from users are used to
      train AI systems in such cases, developers should adhere to applicable data privacy and protection laws and
      ensure that proper measures are put in place to safeguard the security of user data. Deployers should also
      look into setting up acceptable user policies that outline the boundaries for interacting with the AI systems.
      Some boundaries include prohibiting the use of malicious and offensive language or images and abuse of the
      AI system.




                                                                                                                  42
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Deployers that do not develop AI systems in-house may contract a developer to help them in the design and
      development of AI systems. To facilitate the obtaining of information needed by companies to facilitate
      stakeholder management, deployers may wish to institute obligations for developers to provide the relevant
      information as part of the contract between the parties. Depending on the nature of the AI system and the
      risks involved, some categories of information that deployers can request from AI developers could include:




          Data – sources, types                    Model development                         Safeguards within the
          of data, etc.                            process – feature                         model – measures put
                                                   engineering, model                        in place to mitigate
                                                   selection process, etc.                   negative effect of AI on
                                                                                             humans.




      Deployers may also use off-the-shelf or open-source solutions in AI systems. In these cases, data used or AI
      system design and development considerations may not be available to them. To ensure alignment with the
      principles and recommendations in this Guide, developers and deployers can consider the following actions:

      •      Gain as thorough an understanding as possible of the open-source or off-the-shelf solution that it intends
             to use, including its capabilities, other use cases, etc. This will help in assessing the suitability of the
             solution for the AI use case and identify any governance considerations that need to be addressed.

      •      Evaluate the significance of information that is not available to them and assess the corresponding risk
             of the absence of such information to determine the feasibility of using the open-source or off-the-shelf
             solution. For example, a developer that develops facial recognition systems needs to know the type of
             demographic of the dataset that the open-source AI system was trained on to assess if it is adequately
             representative of the population. Absence of such information may result in them being unable to
             evaluate whether the AI system will be fit for purpose in their specific local context.

      Developers can play a key role in supporting deployers in implementing the AI governance framework laid out
      in this Guide. Some areas include:

      • Incorporating features that promote transparency and explainability into the AI system, so that deployers
        can better understand the decision-making process of the system. For example, providing descriptions (e.g.
        data format, data recency, pre-processing steps, etc.) of the datasets used in the development process and
        providing visibility on the more significant features that affect the AI system’s decisions.

      • Sharing the limitations and potential risks associated with the AI system for deployers to determine whether
        to conduct their own impact assessments and/or if it is acceptable for their use case.

      • For deployers that are less mature in AI governance practices, third-party developers can potentially offer
        guidance and expertise on AI governance best practices and can assist deployers in establishing policies
        and controls for deployment of AI systems.




                                                                                                                        43
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      GOJEK
      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      Gojek is an Indonesian on-demand multi-service platform and digital payment group based in Jakarta. Al is
      leveraged for user-base growth and maintaining engagement of consumers through automated allocation of
      promotions, under budget constraints. Automated allocation of promotions identifies users with high
      incremental engagement potential given incentives and prioritises promotion allocation accordingly while
      estimating cost of campaign.

      Consumers interact with promotional campaigns deployed by Campaign Managers. As such, they provide
      implicit feedback on the relevance of campaigns, which is captured in model online metrics. Thanks to this
      mechanism, the Data Science team and Campaign Managers can take informed decisions in model version
      management.




      SMART NATION GROUP (SNG), SINGAPORE
      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      Singapore’s National AI Office (NAIO) established guidelines for product teams in the government building
      custom LLM products, as well as an Al workgroup (with stakeholders from across government) to oversee the
      rigorous testing and safe deployment of products.

      To mitigate the risks of misuse of LLM products, NAIO recommends that all products should include visual UX
      cues to educate users on proper use. Such visual cues include reminders to always double check and adapt
      generated output for use.

      Product teams are also encouraged to consider other education efforts such as workshops, guidebooks, and
      EDMs to raise awareness and literacy of LLM products.




                                                                                                              44
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      MINISTRY OF EDUCATION, SINGAPORE
      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      Singapore’s Ministry of Education (MOE) is developing an AI-enabled Adaptive Learning System (ALS) for
      deployment within the Student Learning Space (SLS), Singapore’s national online learning portal. The ALS is
      one of MOE’s three educational AI use cases announced under the National AI Strategy launched in
      November 2019.

      Various stakeholders were engaged for their views during the design and development of the ALS. Ideas and
      feedback from policymakers, curriculum and technical experts, as well as users (teachers and students) were
      sought and incorporated at the planning, building, and piloting phases.

      To continually improve the performance of the ALS, teachers are also able to give suggestions for
      improvements directly to MOE. Based on their feedback on wanting more control and visibility about the
      content and assessment items being presented to students, the next iteration of the ALS will enable teachers
      to add their own resources into the resource pool for recommendation to their students, enhancing the quality
      of resources and improving the ALS’ recommendation algorithm.




                                                                                                                 45
National-level
Recommendations
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      D. National-level Recommendations
      This section is intended for policy makers.


      This section covers national-level recommendations to ensure responsible design, development, and
      deployment of AI systems. It is also important to note that cross-border collaboration is essential for promoting
      responsible AI governance and ensuring that best practices and safeguards are shared within ASEAN and
      across different regions. Such collaboration can help facilitate the exchange of knowledge, expertise, and
      resources among different countries and regions.


      Nurturing AI talent and upskilling workforce

      With the increasing use of AI in a variety of industries, it is important to ensure that a country’s workforce can
      adapt to the new ways of working and possesses enough digital skills to interact effectively with AI systems.

      There are a few levels of AI capabilities that can be developed:

      • Baseline level to operate AI applications;

      • Intermediate level to maintain and rectify issues with AI applications; and

      • Higher level to develop AI capabilities

      Depending on the nature of jobs and industries, governments and policymakers should consider implementing
      measures to upskill the workforce according to the AI capabilities required.

      Governments can collaborate closely with both public and private sectors to establish platforms and resources
      for employees to upskill themselves in their respective fields. Companies in private sectors bring with them
      industry-specific expertise and knowledge that can be used to curate training materials for AI-enabled
      technologies in different sectors. Public and private agencies can collaborate to organise industry-specific AI
      courses and forums to help personnel learn about the types of AI systems in the market and how they will
      increasingly play the role of operator of AI systems instead of manually performing tasks on their own. In
      Singapore for example, the Singapore Computer Society collaborated with IMDA and Nanyang Technological
      University to offer a professional certification program on AI Ethics and Governance. Industry players can also
      offer industry-based AI programmes where workers and graduating students can participate in short stints to
      learn more about the industry and its relevant AI technologies.

      Individuals should also be able to acquire deeper insights into AI through schools and educational institutes.
      The curriculum of STEM disciplines needs to be periodically reviewed to keep up to date with the newest
      technological advancements in the data analytics and AI space. For other disciplines, it is also important that
      the concept of AI is introduced so students are aware of what AI can do and how it might automate part of
      their jobs in the future. Educational institutes can also invite AI experts to share knowledge and cross-pollinate
      ideas on use cases for AI and their corresponding AI governance considerations.

      Beyond the technical knowledge of AI, there is also a need to increase individuals’ understanding of ethical
      principles and how they are used to identify, evaluate, and mitigate the ethical implications of AI systems. For
      example, the principle of fairness and equity guides the identification and analysis of bias in AI systems, as
      well as the development of mitigation strategies. A robust curriculum for AI ethics should be developed and
      incorporated into STEM courses or training for AI practitioners to ensure that such individuals have a strong
      ethical foundation to guide future design, development, and deployment of AI technologies.



                                                                                                                     47
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Certain groups of workers may experience significant changes in their job roles due to the introduction of AI.
      For example, automation of production and testing steps in manufacturing facilities will mean that certain job
      roles are made obsolete, since AI-augmented machines can work effectively and efficiently round-the-clock.
      Field agronomists may find that their on-farm services are less needed as AI-driven forecasting and
      agronomic advisory applications give farmers the guidance to optimally produce throughout the season. In
      these cases, it is important for policymakers to provide adequate support to affected employees as they
      transition to new job roles, such as offering training and upskilling programmes and access to other
      employment opportunities for those who wish to make a mid-career switch.

      Governments should also collaborate with the private sector to determine the pool of future AI-trained
      graduates who will be needed to help their countries achieve longer-term digital economy objectives. To best
      develop this pipeline of talent and ensure educational institutions are equipped with curricula that align most
      closely with AI industry trends and their advances, governments (including respective Ministries of Education)
      should work with the private sector to:

      •     Co-develop curricula that are relevant and up to date with industry trends.

      •     Facilitate AI private sector and research professionals giving lectures to students.

      •     Encourage and help foster professional internship and co-opt programmes among educational
            institutions and the private sector.

      •     Encourage professors and lecturers at educational institutions to be seconded to private sector AI firms.
            This will ensure the latest AI technologies and trends are reflected in curricula, which will help to mitigate
            training time needed for fresh graduates once they go into the workforce.


      Supporting AI innovation ecosystem and promoting investment in AI start-ups

      Governments should take actions to foster the growth of the AI innovation ecosystem. A supportive
      environment for AI development should be created, where companies are able to access and leverage data,
      digital technologies, and infrastructure. There should be support for businesses to build the foundational
      digital infrastructure they need to implement AI, such as organising information sessions for senior leaders to
      learn about the types of infrastructure they can invest in and the leading industry solutions that can help them
      scale up AI design, development, and deployment efforts. A short-term grant could also be offered to
      companies who wish to kickstart the adoption of AI in operations.

      AI development is a data-intensive process that requires the ingestion and processing of vast amounts of
      data. Some businesses may face difficulties in trying to obtain the required data and subsequently storing it in
      an appropriate manner. Governments can bridge these data gaps by making selected government data freely
      available for businesses to use and develop AI systems that could benefit national interests. In addition,
      encouraging data sharing within and between public and private sectors will help to create a rich data
      environment for AI to thrive.

      Along with the provision of freely accessible data, support on setting up effective data governance measures
      and structure can also be provided to ensure that organisations are able to access and use the data in a
      responsible and ethical manner. For example, developers and deployers can be introduced to data
      anonymisation processes for data privacy and protection or data lineage tools to help them understand the




                                                                                                                       48
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      end-to-end lifecycle of the data that is used during AI design, development, and deployment. Governments
      should encourage the adoption of privacy enhancing technologies (PETs). PETs refer to digital solutions that
      allow information to be collected, processed, analysed, and shared while protecting data confidentiality and
      privacy25. The use of PETs would be especially useful in making selected government data freely available to
      organisations for AI development and deployment.

      To support the development of data pools that can help the development of AI, facilitating cross-border data
      flow will also play an important role. To enable this, governments should work with other governments to
      establish data sharing and data transfer mechanisms, to help facilitate companies’ access to various data
      sources that can help develop and train AI systems. It is also useful for governments to work towards
      consistency and interoperability between national data protection legal frameworks and AI governance efforts.
      This should include highlighting key areas of interaction between data protection and AI, including lawful
      grounds for processing personal data as training data for AI systems, data protection impact assessments
      (where required), transparency obligations, rights of data subjects that should be respected (such as access,
      erasure, and correction), and parental consent and children’s rights.

      Beyond cross-border data flows, it is also worthwhile for governments to explore collaboration across the
      wider ecosystem, which includes regulatory bodies, non-profit organisations, AI industry leaders, and other
      stakeholders who are involved in the design, development, and deployment of AI systems. There needs to be
      discussions around different collaboration models where required stakeholders within the ecosystem
      contribute their own expertise at different levels of the AI journey. Notably, private and public sector
      collaboration ensures that both public and private entities develop and deploy AI in a secure and ethical
      manner.

      Government agencies can also provide funding and grants to AI start-ups to help their employees gain the
      skills and knowledge to design, develop, and deploy better AI systems. This can be done through subsidising
      course fees for AI and AI ethics courses or providing start-ups with incentives when they adopt AI governance
      tools. Equipping start-ups with the skilled manpower that they need to develop and deploy AI responsibly is
      also crucial for building trust in AI and helping AI adoption to scale across the region.

      Voluntary and mutually agreed knowledge sharing and exchange is also key to enriching the AI innovation
      ecosystem in countries. To facilitate the sharing of knowledge and best practices for AI, government bodies
      can collaborate with industry partners to organise forums where successful AI use cases are presented and
      experts on AI in the respective sectors share about their experience and the new developments in the AI
      space.

      To facilitate the investment process in AI start-ups, governments can work with relevant parties to develop an
      online platform or marketplace where AI start-ups can post about their offerings and how they are adhering to
      AI governance principles, and investors can easily view all the AI start-ups and their needs in one place.
      Providing such a platform will not only increase the visibility of AI start-ups, but also encourage more AI
      companies to adopt AI governance practices as it is seen as a value proposition to potential investors.

      Promoting investments in AI start-ups is important to ensure that they can scale sufficiently and subsequently
      develop into bigger players in the AI space. Governments should formulate policies to attract investment in AI
      start-ups, such as offering incentives to deployers that employ their services and encouraging AI adoption in
      both public and private sectors.


      25 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Emerging privacy-enhancing technologies” (8 March 2023) < https://www.oecd-

      ilibrary.org/docserver/bf121be4-en.pdf?expires=1693742862&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=FD0CEDF75CDC287045BE68749B811CBE >

                                                                                                                                                49
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Investing in AI research and development

      Investing in AI research and development ensures that countries are kept abreast of the latest developments
      in AI and can implement cutting-edge AI solutions for national problems faced by end users. Encouraging
      research related to the cybersecurity of AI, AI governance, and AI ethics is also key to ensuring that the safety
      and resiliency of AI systems and tools also advance in parallel with new use cases. Governments can fund AI
      research initiatives by providing grants for the hiring of required AI and STEM-related talent or developing a
      development sandbox for researchers to conduct pilots of their products. Setting up such AI sandboxes not
      only enables researchers to iterate upon their solutions in preparation for a formal launch into the market, but
      also provides a regulated environment where relevant authorities can ensure compliance of AI systems to
      regulations.

      To boost AI research capabilities, governments can build a talent pool of AI experts who will specifically
      contribute to the design, development, and deployment of AI. Scholarships for post-graduate AI research or
      STEM-related undergraduate courses will help attract more locals and foreign talents to study and eventually
      work in the AI space. Private companies can also be incentivised to upskill their employees who are already
      working in STEM-related fields and build up their own internal AI research and development capabilities.

      Ensuring that there is proper digital infrastructure is also another enabler for AI research and development.
      Governments can work with partners in the private sector to set up and invest in digital infrastructure such as
      creating a use case laboratory with appropriate data storage and computing power to improve research
      efficiency. Governments can also make AI research and development more accessible to organisations of all
      sizes by developing open-source AI platforms which are available for free and provide the necessary tools
      and computing resources to train and test AI systems more efficiently.

      Governments can also work to establish triple helix partnerships between the research community, private
      sector, and government agencies to facilitate cross-pollination of ideas and healthy discourse on pioneering
      ideas and technologies.

      Via open data and data sharing, governments can ensure that there is a thriving and rich data environment for
      AI systems to be trained. The quality and diversity of the large pool of data will ensure accurate and effective
      AI systems, accelerate the pace of innovation while also reducing the cost and barriers of entry into AI
      development. While more data is being made available to organisations looking to develop or deploy AI
      systems, it is also important that organisations work towards ensuring that AI systems have been trained on
      enough data relevant to their language(s), region, and industries.


      Promoting adoption of useful tools by businesses to implement the ASEAN Guide on AI
      Governance and Ethics

      AI governance processes can involve many rounds of checks and reviews by different stakeholders and may
      result in high costs when too many of such processes are done manually. For example, manual data
      validation steps can require employees to spend a significant amount of time inspecting a large number of
      datasets. As developers and deployers scale up AI systems, it is unsustainable to have employees manually
      inspect data and the model training process. Developers and deployers can make use of tools to enable the
      implementation of AI governance in operations and ensure that documentation and validation processes are
      more efficient.




                                                                                                                    50
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      One example of such tools is model provenance tools that keep track of and record every step of the system
      lifecycle. Model provenance tools can document details like where the training and testing data came from,
      data processing steps performed, feature extraction process and model selection process. Without the use of
      such tools, employees will need to manually record every detail and human error may result in inaccurate
      model provenance records. In order to scale up the use of AI in businesses, model provenance tools are
      essential to provide visibility across the lifecycle of many AI systems.

      Another example of such tools is fairness tools to assess and mitigate fairness issues with AI systems. Such
      tools enable developers and deployers to test AI systems against a series of bias and fairness metrics and
      implement mitigation algorithms to correct unfair biasness. Computing fairness metrics can be computationally
      intensive and difficult for developers to perform manually. As more AI systems are integrated into operations,
      it is important that users’ trust in AI are not negatively affected by inherent or other biases. Employing the use
      of AI fairness tools will enable developers and deployers to efficiently assess fairness metrics and gain the
      trust of users by designing, developing, and deploying fair AI systems.

      The inability to understand how AI systems function and make decisions is one of the key reasons for mistrust
      in AI. Developers and deployers can use explainable AI tools to understand and interpret predictions made by
      machine learning systems. A What-If Tool is an example of an explainable AI tool that provides a user-friendly
      interface for developers to better understand the AI system. Through the What-If Tool, developers can change
      system inputs and re-run the system to observe how the system output changes in response to specific
      changes in input. This allows humans to have a better understanding of which features are more dominant in
      the system’s decision-making process and validate some aspects of the AI system’s behaviour.

      Organisations can also adopt tools that have a range of testing capabilities for different principles. For
      example, AI Verify can be used to conduct technical tests and process checks on AI systems against
      principles of explainability, fairness, as well as robustness. There are also process checks for transparency,
      security, accountability, data governance and human-centricity26.

      In order to fully reap the benefits of such useful tools, employees will also need to know how they work and
      how to use them to design, develop, and deploy AI responsibly. Government agencies can provide subsidies
      or grants for employees who wish to go for training on how to operate and leverage such tools for AI design,
      development, and deployment.

      Given that AI is continually evolving, it is also important to engage the wider developer community in co-
      developing tools. For example, in Singapore, IMDA has set up the AI Verify Foundation to harness the
      collective power and contributions of the global open-source community to develop the AI Verify testing tool
      for the responsible use of AI. The Foundation will boost AI testing capabilities and assurance to meet the
      needs of companies and regulators globally.

      Apart from selecting such tools to deploy in the AI system lifecycle, it is important that developers and
      deployers also adopt best practices in data governance, software development and cybersecurity to ensure
      that such tools do not compromise the well-being of users.




      26 AI Verify Foundation, “What is AI Verify?” (2023) < https://aiverifyfoundation.sg/what-is-ai-verify/ >


                                                                                                                     51
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




        Raising awareness among citizens on the effects of AI in society

       By raising awareness of the potential risks and benefits of AI, citizens can make informed decisions about the
       appropriate use of AI and take appropriate actions to protect themselves from harmful uses of AI systems.

       This can be done by engaging with the public through roadshows, social media platforms and other public
       forums to demonstrate AI technologies and their potential impact on society. Such public engagements can
       also be done in collaboration with private companies which provide AI-enabled services that are widely used
       in citizens’ daily lives. Seeing how AI is used in these platforms that are commonly used by citizens will help
       them relate better to AI and be more aware of the risks of using AI-enabled technologies.

       Policymakers and the relevant government agencies can also look at how to incorporate AI into general
       education to help citizens understand how AI works and the ethical considerations for responsible use of AI.

       Government agencies can also consider implementing AI-enabled technologies for citizen-facing applications
       or platforms. For example, employing the use of chatbots and/or virtual assistants to provide 24/7 customer
       service to citizens and answer frequently asked questions. Along with the deployment of such AI technologies,
       a general disclosure should also be provided to inform citizens that they will be interacting with an AI system
       and what the AI system is expected to do when under normal behaviour. There should also be an avenue for
       citizens to provide feedback on the performance of the AI system, especially in cases where it malfunctions,
       so that the appropriate mitigating actions can be taken to prevent further misinformation or harm.

       As AI systems increasingly become part of operations, it is important that vulnerable citizens are protected
       from malicious actors using AI with ill intentions, such as to generate or disseminate misinformation and online
       falsehoods. Governments should increase public education efforts on AI systems and the potential pitfalls so
       that citizens are empowered to be discerning consumers of information. One way to do this is through media
       literacy education to educate the public on how to identify and verify credible sources of information and
       combat misinformation from AI systems.




                                                                                                                   52
Regional-level
Recommendations
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      E. Regional-level Recommendations
      This section is intended for policy makers.

      Setting up an ASEAN Working Group on AI Governance to drive and oversee AI governance
      initiatives in the region
      The ASEAN Working Group on AI Governance can lead the technical and operational implementation of AI
      governance action plans in the region. The Working Group can consist of representatives from each of the
      ASEAN member states who can work together to roll out the recommendations laid out in this Guide, as well
      as provide guidance for ASEAN countries who wish to adopt components of this Guide, and where
      appropriate, include consultation with other industry partners for their views and input. The ASEAN Working
      Group can also lead efforts to further international cooperation on AI governance approaches, including
      through engaging ASEAN’s various dialogue partners on AI governance issues.

      The responsibilities of the Working Group can include (non-exhaustive):



        1        Development and implementation of regional tools for AI governance



                 Provision of support and recommendations for policies to nurture AI talent and upskill workforce
        2        across ASEAN


                 Provision of support and recommendations for initiatives to support the AI ecosystem in ASEAN
        3        and promote investment in AI start-ups


                 Provision of platforms to encourage cross-pollination of ideas between the AI research and
        4        development community and ASEAN


                 Keeping abreast of new developments in the AI space (e.g., generative AI) and related emerging
        5        technology and making recommendations on updates to be made to the AI governance
                 frameworks in the region



      Adaptation of this Guide to address governance of generative AI
      Generative AI, refers to a branch of artificial intelligence where new content, such as text, imagery, and audio,
      is created by algorithms in response to prompts. Unlike traditional AI systems that are primarily used for tasks
      such as recommending, filtering, and making predictions as a primary output, generative AI systems learn the
      underlying distribution of the training data and generate new and original data that resembles the input they
      were trained on. Generative AI systems have recently been able to produce outputs that are remarkably
      realistic and sometimes indistinguishable from human-created content. While generative AI shows promising
      transformative impacts in numerous fields including art, entertainment, scientific research and healthcare, the
      responsible development and deployment of generative AI also raises complex ethical, legal, and societal
      issues that require careful attention.

      In particular, generative AI brings with it unique risks that may require new approaches to governing it. Some
      of these risks include:

                                                                                                                    54
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




              Mistakes and anthropomorphism: Generative AI models are not fool-proof and can sometimes make
              mistakes. However, these mistakes often appear to be highly coherent and human-like, and take on
              anthropomorphisation, commonly known as “hallucinations”. For example, some language models have
              created convincing but erroneous responses to medical questions, or generated software code that is
              susceptible to vulnerabilities.
              Factually inaccurate responses and disinformation: Generative AI systems can be used to generate
              and propagate false or misleading information to a larger scale, shaping public perception and eroding
              trust in reliable sources of information. One example of this is the dissemination of fake news, which
              may become increasingly difficult to identify if malicious actors use generative AI to generate convincing
              text, images, and videos with the intention to mislead others.

              Deepfakes, impersonation, fraudulent and malicious activities: Generative AI carries certain risks
              of being used for impersonation due to its ability to generate realistic content, such as text, images, and
              voices. One such risk is the use of generative AI to create deepfakes, which are manipulated videos or
              images that convincingly depict individuals saying or doing things they never actually did. Deepfakes
              can be utilised to deceive others into divulging confidential or personal information by posing as real
              individuals in online interactions or social networks. Another example is in the use of generative AI to
              develop phishing emails. In the past, phishing emails are often characterised by misspellings and
              grammatical errors. However, using generative AI to generate these emails omits this common
              “red flag”, thus making it more difficult for a user to distinguish between legitimate emails and
              compromised ones.

              Infringement of intellectual property rights: The development of generative AI systems requires
              huge amounts of data for model training, validation, and testing. This raises concerns about the use of
              copyrighted materials as some of these data collected and used may be copyrighted and generative AI
              developers may face legal repercussions if found using them without permission and in the absence of
              relevant fair use exceptions under local copyright laws.

              Generative AI systems can also learn from copyrighted material, such as images and music, without
              proper authorisation from the copyright holder. If the generated content closely resembles the style
              and/or form of the original copyrighted work and are insufficiently transformative, it may infringe upon
              the rights of the copyright holder.

              Privacy and confidentiality: Unlike traditional AI systems, generative AI systems have a tendency to
              memorise – which refers to the ability of a machine learning model to remember and reproduce specific
              examples from its training data27. Malicious actors may be able to reconstruct training data by querying
              the generative AI system, and this can compromise the privacy of individuals represented by the
              dataset, especially in cases where sensitive datasets (e.g., medical datasets) are used. In a corporate
              setting, employees may unconsciously disclose confidential information during their interaction with
              generative AI systems.




      27 Berkeley Artificial Intelligence Research, “Evaluating and Testing Unintended Memorisation in Neural Networks” (13 August 2019)

      < https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/2019/08/13/memorization/ >

                                                                                                                                           55
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




              Propagation of embedded biases: Generative AI systems have the ability to capture and reflect the
              biases present in the training dataset. If not properly addressed, these biases can be inherited and
              result in biased or toxic output that reinforces biased or discriminatory stereotypes. For example, image
              generation systems prompted with “African worker” may generate images of individuals in tattered
              clothing and rudimentary tools, while simultaneously generating images of wealthy individuals when
              prompted with “European worker”28. This highlights the risk of propagation of biases from foundation
              models to downstream models trained from them, which perpetuates such biases and stereotypes.




      Generative AI brings with it unique risks and the principles and components of AI governance defined in this
      Guide may need to be adapted to ensure responsible design, development, and deployment of generative AI.
      This is something that has already caught the attention of regulatory authorities across the world. In the
      region, Singapore’s IMDA and Aicadium have jointly published a discussion paper - “Generative AI:
      Implications for Trust and Governance”29, which shares some of Singapore’s policy thinking on how to
      develop an ecosystem for trustworthy and responsible adoption of generative AI while building on existing
      frameworks and tools.

      One area worth exploring is the allocation of responsibility and liability. Here, there is space for policymakers
      to facilitate and co-create with developers a shared responsibility framework. Such a framework aims to clarify
      the responsibilities of all parties in the AI system life cycle, as well as the safeguards and measures they need
      to respectively undertake.

      Noting the increased attention on the role and responsibility of developers in generative AI, guidelines for
      ensuring developer accountability and integrity in the design and development of generative AI systems could
      also be developed.

      This is also something that can be built off existing governance frameworks, which will need to be adapted to
      manage the unique risks of generative AI that have been detailed above. For example, given that generative
      AI systems are primarily used for content generation, it would be useful to provide specific guidance on how
      governance processes can be adapted to provide users with the ability to distinguish AI-generated content
      versus authentically generated ones through transparency. One way is to create a digital “watermark” that can
      be tagged to content generated by generative AI systems so users know when they are interacting with
      synthetically generated content and can make more informed decisions.

      With the introduction and rapid uptake of generative AI systems, it is imperative that ASEAN builds on this
      current framework to develop governance guidelines for generative AI. This is also a good initial project for the
      proposed ASEAN Working Group to take up.




      28 Infocomm Media Development Authority and Aicadium, “Generative AI: Implications for Trust and Governance” (2023)

      < https://aiverifyfoundation.sg/downloads/Discussion_Paper.pdf >
      29 Infocomm Media Development Authority and Aicadium, “Generative AI: Implications for Trust and Governance” (2023)

      < https://aiverifyfoundation.sg/downloads/Discussion_Paper.pdf >




                                                                                                                            56
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Compiling a compendium of use cases demonstrating practical implementation of the Guide
      by organisations operating in ASEAN

      A compendium of AI governance practices could be useful to practically illustrate how various organisations
      and/or government agencies in ASEAN have implemented or aligned their AI governance practices with the
      ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics. It also shows how organisations have tailored the Guide to their
      industry needs and nature of business and benefited from the responsible use of AI.

      Building a compendium of such AI governance examples in the region not only helps featured organisations
      stand out from others, but also builds trust with users and other stakeholders that use AI-enabled solutions.
      Showcasing the commitment of these organisations to AI governance also helps them promote themselves as
      responsible AI practitioners to other users outside ASEAN.

      As more companies and government agencies are featured on the compendium, it is likely that organisations
      which have not implemented AI governance solutions will be inspired to do so as well, establishing a virtuous
      cycle of trust in AI.




                                                                                                            57
Conclusion
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Conclusion

      One of the aims and purposes of ASEAN is to promote active collaboration and mutual assistance on matters
      of common interest in the economic, social, technical, and scientific fields. This Guide is collaboratively
      developed by all ASEAN member states and will serve as a regional best practice guidance on AI governance
      and ethics.

      This Guide also serves as a practical guide for organisations and government agencies in the region that wish
      to design, develop, and deploy AI technologies. It is not meant to be exhaustive and static but rather, a living
      document that is periodically reviewed and enhanced as needed.

      Member states, developers and deployers operating in their jurisdictions are recommended to apply, on
      voluntary basis, the provisions in this Guide. Nothing in this Guide may be interpreted as replacing or
      changing any party’s legal obligations or rights under any member state’s laws.




                                                                                                                   59
Annex A: AI Risk Impact
Assessment Template
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Annex A: AI Risk Impact Assessment Template

      The Risk Impact Assessment below is adapted from Singapore’s PDPC’s Implementation and Self-
      Assessment Guide for Organisations.30


      Purpose of AI Risk Impact Assessment
      The purpose of the assessment below is to identify potential risks and vulnerabilities associated with the AI
      system and ensure that the design, development, deployment, and monitoring of the AI system complies with
      the components set out in the Guide above. The assessment also ensures consistent and systematic
      documentation of information that might be useful to the risk assessment of AI systems.


      Who should use this assessment?
      Developers and deployers of AI systems as well as AI governance/AI ethics committees within organisations.


      How should this assessment be used?
      The assessment below sets out a list of questions, based on and organised according to the four key areas
      described in Guide, for developers and deployers to consider in a systematic manner. The list of questions in
      the assessment below are a mix of open-ended and yes/no questions - developers or deployers filling in the
      assessment should fill in the ‘Response’ column respectively. Developers and deployers should refer to the
      Guide for definitions of terms and explanation of concepts used in the assessment below. In addition to the
      points called out by the assessment below, developers and deployers are free to implement other measures
      that best fit the purpose and context of their AI deployment, as appropriate.

      When using the assessment, developers and deployers should consider whether the questions and practices
      are relevant to their unique business context and industry.




      30 Personal Data Protection Commission Singapore, “Companion to the Model AI Governance Framework – Implementation and Self-Assessment

      Guide for Organisations” (January 2020) < https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/-/media/files/pdpc/pdf-files/resource-for-organisation/ai/sgisago.pdf >

                                                                                                                                                  61
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                                       Useful industry examples, practices
         #                 Guiding Question                                                                                       Response
                                                                       and guides for consideration

       1. Objectives of deploying AI
       This section guides developers and deployers on how to include ethical considerations in the development of the AI
       system’s problem statement and business objectives

      1.1        Has a clear purpose in using                    • Consider whether the AI system is able                            []
                 the identified AI system been                     to address the identified problem or
                 defined (e.g., operational                        issue
                 efficiency and cost reduction)?

      1.2        Has an assessment been done                     • Consider whether to conduct a cost-                               []
                 to verify that the expected                       benefit analysis
                 benefits of implementing the AI
                                                                 • Consider whether it is useful to leverage
                 system in a responsible manner
                                                                   benchmarks and case studies for similar
                 (as described in the Guide)
                                                                   AI systems (e.g., PDPC’s Compendium
                 outweighs the expected costs?
                                                                   of Use Cases vols 1 and 231)

      1.3        Is the use of the AI system                     • Consider developing a Code of Ethics                              []
                 consistent with the                               for the use of AI that is in line with or can
                 organisation’s core values                        be incorporated into the organisation’s
                 and/or societal expectations?                     mission statement

      1.4        Does the AI system align with                   • Consider developing a list of strategic                           []
                 one or more of the                                priorities for the organisation
                 organisation’s strategic
                 priorities?

       2. Internal governance structures and measures
       This section guides developers and deployers to develop appropriate internal governance structures to ensure that the
       relevant principles and recommendations set out in the Guide are adhered to

      2.1        Is there an existing governance                 • Consider whether there is a need to                               []
                 structure that can be leveraged                   adapt existing governance, risk, and
                 to oversee the use of the AI                      compliance (GRC) structures to
                 system? If not, is there a                        incorporate AI governance processes for
                 governance structure in place                     the AI system
                 to oversee the use of the AI
                                                                 • Consider whether it is necessary to
                 system?
                                                                   implement a process where each
                                                                   department’s head is accountable for the
                                                                   controls and policies that pertain to the
                                                                   respective areas, overseen by subject
                                                                   matter experts such as chief security
                                                                   officer or data protection officer

      31 Infocomm Media Development Authority, “Compendium of Use Cases: Practical Illustrations of the Model AI Governance Framework” (2020)

      < https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/-/media/files/pdpc/pdf-files/resource-for-organisation/ai/sgaigovusecases.pdf >

                                                                                                                                                62
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                         Useful industry examples, practices
         #             Guiding Question                                                                      Response
                                                         and guides for consideration

       2. Internal governance structures and measures
       This section guides developers and deployers to develop appropriate internal governance structures to ensure that the
       relevant principles and recommendations set out in the Guide are adhered to

                                                     • Consider a sandbox type of governance                    []
                                                       to testbed and deploy AI systems, before
                                                       fully-fledged governance structures are
                                                       put in place

      2.2      Does the organisation’s board         • Consider whether it is useful to form a                  []
               and/or senior management                committee/board that is chaired by the
               support and participate in AI           senior management and include senior
               governance?                             leaders from the various departments

                                                     • Consider having senior management set
                                                       clear expectations/directions for AI
                                                       governance within the organisation

      2.3      Are the roles and                     • Consider defining separate roles and                     []
               responsibilities of the personnel       responsibilities for business and
               involved in the various AI              technical staff
               governance processes clearly
                                                        • Business staff responsible for defining
               defined?
                                                          business goals and business rules,
                                                          and checking that an AI system
                                                          behaves consistently with those goals
                                                          and rules

                                                        • Technical staff responsible for data
                                                          practices, security, stability, error
                                                          handling

      2.4      Are the personnel involved in         • Consider the importance and relevance                    []
               various AI governance                   of hiring talent with the right skillsets
               processes properly trained and
                                                     • Consider educating key internal
               equipped with the necessary
                                                       stakeholders to increase awareness of
               resources and guidance to
                                                       AI governance guidelines
               perform duties?
                                                     • Consider educating employees,
                                                       particularly those using the AI system or
                                                       with customer-facing roles, to identify
                                                       and report potential ethical concerns
                                                       relating to AI design, development, or
                                                       deployment




                                                                                                                          63
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                                    Useful industry examples, practices
         #                Guiding Question                                                                                         Response
                                                                    and guides for consideration

       2. Determining
       3. Internal governance
                       the levelstructures
                                 of human and  measuresin AI-augmented decision-making
                                           involvement
       This section
            section guides
                     guides developers
                             developers and
                                         anddeployers
                                             deployerstoindevelop  appropriate
                                                            determining        internal governance
                                                                        the appropriate             structures
                                                                                          extent of human      to ensure
                                                                                                            oversight     that the
                                                                                                                      in their AI-
       relevant principles and recommendations
       augmented decision-making process         set out in the Guide are adhered  to


      3.1        What is the probability and                   • Consider whether it is necessary to list                             []
                 severity of harm on users or                    all internal and external stakeholders,
                 developers and deployers of                     and the impact on them accordingly
                 the AI system? Please
                                                               • Consider whether it is necessary to
                 elaborate on the potential harm.
                                                                 assess risks from a technical
                                                                 perspective and from a personal data
                                                                 protection perspective (e.g., PDPC’s
                                                                 Guide to Data Protection Impact
                                                                 Assessments32)

      3.2        What is the appropriate level of              • Human-in-the-loop, human-over-the-                                   []
                 human involvement in AI-                        loop, human-out-of-the-loop
                 augmented decision-making?
                                                               • Consider severity and probability of risks
                                                                 and other relevant factors

      3.3        What are some mechanisms                      • Consider whether it is useful to                                     []
                 that must be put in place to                    determine and implement an appropriate
                 continually identify, review, and               review period for retraining the AI
                 mitigate risks after deployment                 model(s)
                 of the AI system?
                                                               • Consider defining key performance
                                                                 indicators    for    the AI    system’s
                                                                 performance and putting in place
                                                                 measure to alert relevant employees
                                                                 when       AI     system   performance
                                                                 deteriorates

                                                               • Consider developing scenario-based
                                                                 response plans in the event that risk
                                                                 management efforts fail




      32 Personal Data Protection Commission Singapore, “Guide to Data Protection Impact Assessments” (2021) < https://www.pdpc.gov.sg/-

      /media/Files/PDPC/PDF-Files/Other-Guides/DPIA/Guide-to-Data-Protection-Impact-Assessments-14-Sep-2021.pdf >

                                                                                                                                              64
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                                     Useful industry examples, practices
         #                Guiding Question                                                                                        Response
                                                                     and guides for consideration

       3. Determining the level of human involvement in AI-augmented decision-making
       This section guides developers and deployers in determining the appropriate extent of human oversight in their AI-
       augmented decision-making process

      3.4        For safety-critical systems, how               • Consider whether it is necessary and                               []
                 will relevant personnel be able                  feasible to put in place controls to allow
                 to assume control where                          the graceful shutdown of the AI system
                 necessary? Or will the AI                        and/or bring it back to safe state, in the
                 system be able to safely                         event of system failure
                 disengage itself where
                                                                • When an AI system is making a decision
                 necessary?
                                                                  for which it is significantly unsure of the
                                                                  answer/prediction, consider designing
                                                                  the AI system to be able to flag these
                                                                  cases and triage them for a human to
                                                                  review
       4. Operations management
       This section guides developers and deployers in adopting responsible measures (as set out in the principles and Guide
       above) in the operations aspect of the design, development, and deployment of AI systems

       Ensuring personal data protection

      4.1        Are there accountability-based                 • Consider     adopting    industry best                             []
                 practices in data management                     practices and engineering standards to
                 and protection?                                  ensure compliance with relevant data
                                                                  protection laws, such as PDPA33

                                                                • Consider referring to OECD Privacy
                                                                  Principles34

                                                                • Consider whether the AI system can be
                                                                  trained on pseudonymised or de-
                                                                  identified data

       Understanding the lineage of data

      4.2        Are there measures in place to                 • Consider developing and maintaining a                              []
                 trace the lineage of data (i.e.                  data provenance record
                 backward data lineage, forward
                                                                • Consider whether it is useful to create a
                 data lineage and end-to-end
                                                                  data inventory, data dictionaries, data
                 data lineage)?
                                                                  change processes and document control
                                                                  mechanisms




      33 Infocomm Media Development Authority, “Trusted Data Sharing Framework” (2019) < https://www.imda.gov.sg/-/media/imda/files/programme/data-

      collaborative-programme/trusted-data-sharing-framework.pdf >
      34 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “OECD Privacy Principles” (2010) < http://oecdprivacy.org/ >
                                                                                                                                                 65
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                                     Useful industry examples, practices
         #                Guiding Question                                                                                        Response
                                                                     and guides for consideration

       4. Operations management
       This section guides developers and deployers in adopting responsible measures (as set out in the principles and Guide
       above) in the operations aspect of the design, development, and deployment of AI systems

                                                               • Consider whether it is useful to establish
                                                                 a data policy team to manage tracking of
                                                                 data lineage with proper controls

       Understanding risks of using datasets from a third party

      4.3        What are the risks of using                   • Consider obtaining datasets only from                               []
                 datasets from third party?                      trusted third-party sources that are
                                                                 certified with proper data protection
                                                                 practices

                                                               • Consider adopting the practices within
                                                                 IMDA’s      Trusted    Data     Sharing
                                                                 Framework  35   when establishing data
                                                                 partnerships (e.g., create a common
                                                                 “data-sharing language”)


       Ensuring data quality

      4.4        Can the accuracy of the dataset               • Consider reviewing data in detail against                           []
                 in terms of how well the values                 its metadata
                 in the dataset match the true
                                                               • Consider whether it is useful to develop
                 characteristics of the entity
                                                                 a taxonomy of data annotation to
                 described by the dataset be
                                                                 standardise the process of data labelling
                 verified?

      4.5        Is the dataset used complete in               • Consider whether it is useful to conduct                            []
                 terms of attributes and items?                  validation schema checks (i.e., testing
                                                                 whether the data schema accurately
                                                                 represents the data from the source to
                                                                 ensure that there are no errors in
                                                                 formatting and content)


      4.6        Is the dataset used up to date?               • N.A.                                                                []

      4.7        Is the dataset used relevant?                 • N.A.                                                                []




      35 Infocomm Media Development Authority, “Trusted Data Sharing Framework” (2019) < https://www.imda.gov.sg/-/media/imda/files/programme/data-

      collaborative-programme/trusted-data-sharing-framework.pdf >

                                                                                                                                                 66
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                         Useful industry examples, practices
         #             Guiding Question                                                                      Response
                                                         and guides for consideration

       4. Operations management
       This section guides developers and deployers in adopting responsible measures (as set out in the principles and Guide
       above) in the operations aspect of the design, development, and deployment of AI systems

      4.8      Is the dataset used well-             • Consider setting up an extraction,                       []
               structured and in machine-              transformation, and loading (ETL)
               understandable form?                    process

      4.9      If any human has filtered,            • Consider whether it is necessary to                      []
               applied labels, or edited the           assign roles to the entire data pipeline to
               data, are there measures to             enforce accountability. This would allow
               ensure the quality of data?             an organisation to trace who
                                                       manipulated data and by which rule

       Minimising inherent bias

      4.10     Are there measures in place to        • Consider taking steps to mitigate                        []
               mitigate unintended biases in           inherent bias in datasets, especially
               the dataset used by the AI              where social or demographic data is
               system?                                 being processed for an AI system whose
                                                       output directly impacts individuals

      4.11     Are there any data attributes         • Consider whether removed data is                         []
               that will be prematurely                significant to detecting bias
               removed?

      4.12    Will there be systemic bias that      • N.A.                                                      []
              may result from data collection
              devices?


      4.13    Is the dataset used to produce • Consider benchmarking data                                       []
              the AI system fully representative distributions against population statistics
              of the actual data or environment  to identify and quantify how
              the AI system may operate in?      representative the data is

                                                    • Consider whether it is necessary to use
                                                      a heterogeneous dataset (i.e., data
                                                      collected from different demographic
                                                      groups or from a variety of reliable
                                                      sources)




                                                                                                                          67
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                         Useful industry examples, practices
         #             Guiding Question                                                                      Response
                                                         and guides for consideration

       4. Operations management
       This section guides developers and deployers in adopting responsible measures (as set out in the principles and Guide
       above) in the operations aspect of the design, development, and deployment of AI systems
       Different datasets for training, testing and validation

      4.14     Are different datasets used for       • After training of the AI model, consider                 []
               training, testing and validation        validating the AI model using a separate
               of the AI model(s)?                     validation dataset


      4.15     Will the AI system be tested on       • Consider whether it is necessary to test                 []
               different demographic groups to         the results of different AI systems to
               mitigate systematic bias?               identify potential biases produced by a
                                                       certain system

      Periodic review and updating of datasets

     4.16     Are there measures in place to        • Consider whether it would be useful to                    []
              periodically review and update          schedule regular reviews of datasets
              datasets to ensure its accuracy,
                                                    • Consider whether it would be necessary
              quality, currency, relevance and
                                                      to update the dataset periodically with
              reliability?
                                                      new data that was obtained from the
                                                      actual use of the AI system deployed in
                                                      production or from external sources

                                                    • Consider exploring if there are tools
                                                      available that can automatically notify
                                                      your organisation when new data
                                                      becomes available

       Explainability in Algorithm and System

      4.17     Can how the AI system                 • Consider implementing supplementary                      []
               functions and arrives at a              explanation strategies to explain AI
               particular prediction be                systems, especially for systems that are
               explained?                              less interpretable. Examples of these
                                                       strategies include the use of surrogate
                                                       models, partial dependence plots, global
                                                       variable importance/interaction,
                                                       sensitivity analysis, counterfactual
                                                       explanations, or self-explaining and
                                                       attention-based systems.




                                                                                                                          68
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                         Useful industry examples, practices
         #             Guiding Question                                                                      Response
                                                         and guides for consideration

       4. Operations management
       This section guides developers and deployers in adopting responsible measures (as set out in the principles and Guide
       above) in the operations aspect of the design, development, and deployment of AI systems

                                                     • Consider putting in place a factsheet                    []
                                                       outlining the details on how the AI
                                                       system operates, including how the
                                                       model(s) was/were trained and tested
                                                       (with what types of data), its
                                                       performance metrics, fairness and
                                                       robustness checks, intended uses and
                                                       maintenance

                                                     • Consider whether it is relevant to
                                                       request assistance from the AI solution
                                                       provider to explain how the identified AI
                                                       solution functions

      4.18     Where explainability cannot be        • Consider conducting repeatability tests                  []
               practically achieved, can lesser        in a production environment
               alternatives be considered?
                                                     • Consider performing counterfactual
                                                       fairness testing

       Robustness in Algorithm and System

      4.19     Are there measures in place to        • Consider whether it is relevant to                       []
               ensure that the AI system is            conduct adversarial testing on the AI
               sufficiently robust?                    system to ensure that it is able to handle
                                                       a broader range of unexpected input
                                                       variables (e.g., unexpected changes or
                                                       anomalies)

                                                     • Consider whether it is necessary to put
                                                       in place back-up systems, protocols, or
                                                       procedures in the event the AI system
                                                       produces unacceptable/inaccurate
                                                       results, or fails




                                                                                                                          69
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                         Useful industry examples, practices
         #             Guiding Question                                                                      Response
                                                         and guides for consideration

       4. Operations management
       This section guides developers and deployers in adopting responsible measures (as set out in the principles and Guide
       above) in the operations aspect of the design, development, and deployment of AI systems

       Active monitoring, review and tuning in Algorithm and System

      4.20     Are there measures in place for       • Consider updating the AI system with                     []
               active monitoring, review and           new data points – set up an automated
               regular model tuning when               pipeline to update the system with newer
               appropriate (e.g., changes to           data points via the extraction,
               customer behaviour, commercial          transformation, and loading (ETL)
               objectives, risks, and corporate        process, and retrain the model(s)
               values)?                                periodically when new data points are
                                                       added

                                                     • Consider whether it is useful to gather
                                                       feedback from AI system users via
                                                       multiple channels (e.g., email distribution
                                                       lists, in-app feedback, and periodic user
                                                       discussion forums)

       Traceability in Algorithm and System

      4.21     Will relevant information such        • Consider whether it is useful to track the               []
               as datasets and processes that          AI system’s decision-making process
               yield the AI system’s decisions         and performance using standard
               be documented?                          documentation (e.g., project objectives,
                                                       scope, data and input values, error logs,
                                                       etc.)

                                                     • Consider whether it is useful to ensure
                                                       that all data relevant to traceability is
                                                       stored appropriately and retained for
                                                       durations relevant to the industry

       Reproducibility in Algorithm and System

      4.22     Will an independent team be           • Consider whether it is useful to make                    []
               engaged to check if they can            available replication files (i.e., files that
               produce the same or very                replicate each step of the AI system’s
               similar results using the same          developmental process) to facilitate the
               AI method based on the                  process of testing and reproducing
               documentation relating to the           behaviour
               model made by your
                                                     • Consider whether it is relevant to check
               organisation?
                                                       with the original developer on whether
                                                       the system’s results are reproducible


                                                                                                                          70
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                         Useful industry examples, practices
         #             Guiding Question                                                                      Response
                                                         and guides for consideration

       4. Operations management
       This section guides developers and deployers in adopting responsible measures (as set out in the principles and Guide
       above) in the operations aspect of the design, development, and deployment of AI systems

       Auditability in Algorithm and System

      4.23     Are there measures in place to        • Consider whether it is useful to keep a                 []
               ensure relevant documentation,          comprehensive record of data
               procedure and processes that            provenance, procurement, pre-
               facilitate internal and external        processing, how the data has been
               assessments of the AI system?           processed, lineage of the data, storage,
                                                       and security

                                                     • Consider whether it is useful to
                                                       centralise information digitally in a
                                                       process log

       5. Stakeholder Interaction and Communication
       This section guides developers and deployers in implementing good communication practices to promote transparency
       and inspire trust among their stakeholders when designing, developing, and deploying AI systems

      5.1      Who are the various internal          • Consider customising the communication                  []
               and external stakeholders that          message for the different stakeholders
               will be involved and/or                 who are impacted by the AI system
               impacted by the development
                                                     • Consider providing different levels of
               and deployment of the AI
                                                       explanation for data, model, human
               system?
                                                       involvement, etc.

      5.2      Are there measures in place to        • Consider whether it is necessary to provide              []
               inform the relevant                     information on the role and extent that AI
               stakeholders that AI is used in         played in the decision-making process
               products and/or services?               (e.g., statistical results and inferences) in
                                                       plain language and in a way that is
                                                       meaningful to the individuals impacted by
                                                       the AI system (e.g. infographics, summary
                                                       tables and simple videos)

                                                     • Consider publishing a privacy policy on
                                                       your organisation’s website to share
                                                       information about AI governance practices
                                                       (e.g., data practices, and decision-making
                                                       processes), which can include disclosure of
                                                       third-party engagement, depiction of data
                                                       flow and identification of standards that the
                                                       organisation is compliant with


                                                                                                                          71
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




                                                       Useful industry examples, practices
         #            Guiding Question                                                                    Response
                                                       and guides for consideration

       5. Stakeholder Interaction and Communication
       This section guides developers and deployers in implementing good communication practices to promote transparency
       and inspire trust among their stakeholders when designing, developing, and deploying AI systems

                                                    • Consider informing users how the AI-                  []
                                                      enabled features are expected to behave
                                                      during normal use

      5.3      Will users be given the option to    • Consider informing users of the                       []
               opt out of the AI system by            consequences of choosing to opt out, if
               default or only on request?            such an option is available

      5.4      Are there communication              • Consider providing a hotline or email                 []
               channels in place for users to         contact of relevant personnel such as a
               provide feedback or make               data protection officer or quality service
               enquires?                              manager on the organisation’s website

                                                    • Consider providing an avenue for
                                                      individuals to submit updated data about
                                                      themselves




                                                                                                                      72
Annex B: Use Cases
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Annex B: Use Cases




      Aboitiz Group is over a century old conglomerate established in the Philippines with presence all over Asia
      such as Singapore, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Vietnam, Malaysia, Myanmar, Indonesia, and China. Its investments
      are in power, banking, and financial services, food, land, construction, shipbuilding, infrastructure, and data
      science and artificial intelligence. With its vision to build the first Philippine techglomerate by 2025, the group
      is the forefront of innovation and technology in the country.

      Illustration on establishing internal governance structures and measures
      Aboitiz recognises that AI and ML algorithms are integral assets of the group, therefore, it is imperative to
      have a strategic AI governance framework to ensure that the algorithms and programs are properly managed,
      to support the day-to-day operations of different strategic business units within the group. Consistent
      monitoring and evaluation of programs will aid to achieve the goal of implementing reliable and ethical AI-
      driven decisions. Effective AI governance helps the group improve existing AI-driven processes and decisions
      and mitigate the risks and challenges posed.

      Core objectives of the policy is to support effective governance of the use of AI and ML programs within the
      group. This includes:

      • Establishing appropriate responsibilities for all AI-related programs and decisions.

      • Establishing clear risk assessment protocols of AI-driven decisions and appropriate measures to address
        the different levels of risk; and

      • Regular review of existing organizational values and incorporation of ethical principles into the use of AI.

      In addition to the Model Governance Policy, the group has also established the following Internal
      Governance Structures and Measures for oversight of AI:

      • Ethical considerations related to the use of AI aligned with corporate values.

      • Clear and defined roles and responsibilities for the ethical use of AI technology.

      • All AI-related processes and decisions must be vetted by the management committee; and

      • A multi-stakeholder approach with Model Governance -Management Committee which is composed of the
        representatives of the strategic business units - the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), Data
        Protection Officer (DPO), Chief Operations Officer, Chief Data Officer, Chief Risk Officer, Chief Technology
        and Operations Officer, Audit, Risk, and Compliance AI, AI and Innovation Centre of Excellence, Chief
        Marketing Officer, and Senior Managers (Stakeholders of AI project).

                                                                                                                       74
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Illustration on determining the level of human involvement in AI-augmented decision-making
      To assess the Risk Appetite for AI usage the group has established a risk assessment procedure (i.e. pre-
      development AI risk assessment and pre-deployment risk assessment) to measure the different levels of risk.
      Its focus is on the impact of AI decisions on individuals which aims to help the group determine the
      appropriate levels of human involvement in AI-driven decisions and other remedial measures if necessary.

      Illustration on operations management
      Aboitiz implements AI governance measures throughout the AI project/system lifecycle from the design,
      development, deployment, and monitoring phase.

      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      Aboitiz adopts appropriate strategies to facilitate effective communication with stakeholders to harness
      collaboration and innovation.




                                                                                                              75
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      EY is one of the largest professional services firms in the world, providing a wide range of professional
      services to clients through four integrated service lines - Assurance, Consulting, Strategy and Transactions,
      and Tax. EY’s purpose is building a better working world, and as a leader in Artificial Intelligence, this means
      that EY is committed to developing and deploying trusted AI solutions both internally and for its clients. Thus,
      EY has developed a unique perspective and toolset to help guide their employees and clients when
      developing AI systems. By leveraging these tools and framework, many organisations have benefited from the
      ability to rapidly grow AI adoption through trust. Its close adherence to the AI governance principles also
      provides EY and its clients with a significant level of confidence on the reliability of the developed AI
      implementations.

      Illustration on developing guiding principles for internal governance structures and
      measures
      EY is committed to the responsible implementation of AI systems and as such has defined a set of principles
      to adhere to when implementing and deploying AI within EY. The principles, Accountability | Data Rights |
      Reliability, Safety, & Security | Transparency & Explainability | Fairness & Inclusiveness | Professional
      Responsibility are aligned to the principles in the ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics. They outline
      key areas that guide oversight while implementing AI solutions. EY has already built foundational offerings for
      operationalisation of Trusted AI, which leverages its Trusted AI Framework to assess governance across the
      full AI program. The Trusted AI framework applies a continuous innovation process throughout the AI model
      lifecycle, which includes Agile Governance, Purposeful Design & Vigilant Supervision. This framework helps
      to determine the level of oversight required and the corresponding considerations for oversight management.

      Illustration on operations management
      EY has developed a language-agnostic XOps (DataOps, DevOps, MLOps, ModelOps etc.) platform called EY
      Fabric, a global technology platform, that leverages open-source technologies & frameworks to standardize
      all aspects of model lifecycle. It helps to reduce the development time with Standardised Model
      Development, Automated Model Documentation, Shortened Model Validation and Automated Model
      Deployment & Monitoring, while reducing risks by ensuring reproducibility and repeatability. EY’s application
      of the Trusted AI Framework with EY Fabric provides confidence while automating the repetitive processes in
      model development. This helps to achieve efficiency and reduce development time.

      Additionally, EY bears in mind that it can be a continuous process of fine-tuning models, even after they have
      been deployed. Leveraging EY Fabric capabilities, deployed models can be monitored to ascertain the
      performance and need for corrective action over its full life cycle. Each model’s input data, output data and
      reference data are monitored to determine if any corrective measures to re-train or re-develop the model are
      needed.

                                                                                                              76
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Illustration on determining the level of human involvement in AI-augmented decision-making
      EY adopts an AI Model Risk Tiering approach to assess and classify the models as High, Medium, or Low
      risk. The key areas of risk associated with AI, such as use case design, ethics, data, privacy, algorithmic,
      performance, compliance, technology, and business risks are evaluated to assign a risk tier for every AI
      model. Based on the risk tier, appropriate monitoring and human oversight are put in place for the AI models.




                                                                                                                77
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Gojek is an Indonesian on-demand multi-service platform and digital payment group based in Jakarta. Today,
      it is a super-app offering more than 20 services across several countries in Southeast Asia. As part of GoTo
      group, it contributed to 2.2% of Indonesia’s GDP in 2022 creating employment opportunities for 1.1 to 1.7
      million people (source, 29 March 2023), and connecting merchants (restaurants, grocery stores) with
      consumers. In order to provide a pleasant and efficient experience to all actors of the platform, Gojek
      leverages artificial intelligence (AI) technologies in various sectors, including, but not limited to, driver-order
      matching, cartography and fraud detection.

      AI is also leveraged for user-base growth and maintaining engagement of consumers through automated
      allocation of promotions, under budget constraints.

      This automated allocation of promotions identifies users with high incremental engagement potential given
      incentives and prioritises promotion allocation accordingly while estimating cost of campaign.

      Illustration on operations management - conducting outcome analysis for AI models
      Before deployment of machine learning models, Gojek tests the models’ performance metrics against a set of
      predefined offline benchmarks. Such benchmarking allows evaluation of the AI model’s performance in a
      controlled environment with a fixed set of data, which helps Gojek measure the variation in model outputs for
      successive iterations under the same operating conditions. To ensure repeatability, Gojek monitors and
      ensures that the variation is within an appropriate threshold before the model can be deployed. Conducting
      offline benchmarking also allows Gojek to test model performance without any real-world risk or harm to end
      users.

      Illustration on operations management - monitoring deployed AI models
      For the deployed AI models, Gojek also implements continuous monitoring to measure their online
      performance. The model performance is tracked over time in the production environment and improvement
      areas are identified. For example, if model accuracy starts to decline over time, it could be an indication of
      model drift and mitigating actions will be taken to ensure the model continues to perform optimally over time.




                                                                                                                 78
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Illustration on internal governance structures and measures - defining roles and
      responsibilities for AI
      Gojek has clearly defined roles and responsibilities for the development of AI for automated allocation of
      promotions.

      a) The Data Science team is responsible for modelling the coupon-user interactions, maintaining a weekly
         model training pipeline and providing rollout/experiment allocation strategies week-on-week

      b) The Campaign Managers are responsible for defining discount constructs, campaign budgets and traffic
         between rollout and experiment. The usage of AI models is transparent to the managers, and they
         feedback to the Data Science team if any changes in the model performance is noticed or if any changes
         are required in coupon allocation campaign strategies.

      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      Consumers interact with promotional campaigns deployed by Campaign Managers. As such, they provide
      implicit feedback on the relevance of campaigns, which is captured in model online metrics. Thanks to this
      mechanism, the Data Science team and Campaign Managers can take informed decisions in model version
      management.




                                                                                                             79
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




        [Use case 1] Data Security, Privacy & Transparency

      UCARE.AI (https://www.ucare.ai/home/news/) is a Singapore-based deep-tech start-up, with a proprietary
      award-winning online ML and AI platform built on a cloud-based microservices architecture that provides real-
      time predictive insights, which can be applied to the healthcare sector and beyond. UCARE.AI’s solutions
      have been used by customers such as Parkway Pantai, Singapore’s Ministry of Health, Grab and Great
      Eastern Life Assurance to manage risk, contain cost and maximise efficiency.

      Among their various solutions, UCARE.AI’s AI-powered Cost Predictor (AlgoExpectTM) works with hospitals to
      deliver accurate estimations of hospital bills to patients.

      Illustration on operations management - good data accountability and adhering to privacy
      and data protection policies
      UCARE.AI invested its efforts in good data accountability practices and treated the use of AI with openness
      and transparency. This provided tremendous benefits to patients in terms of seamless experiences in
      hospitals, greater certainty over their medical expenses and less re-financial counselling.

      As a first step, when handling personal data for AI model development, UCARE.AI adhered to the
      requirements of various personal data protection laws and draft bills in its operating regions. Singapore’s
      PDPA (2012) is one such law UCARE.AI kept in mind. Besides obtaining consent prior to any collection and
      use of personal data, UCARE.AI also made efforts to securely encrypt sensitive data. Its connectors were also
      designed to automatically detect such sensitive data and where possible, the algorithm was trained to
      minimise the use of this data in developing the AI model.

      To further boost efforts in data protection, UCARE.AI anonymised client data at source before using it for
      development, thereby minimising the risk of inappropriate access to personal data. This also ensured that in
      the unlikely event of a breach, personal information could not be easily used to trace back to an individual.

      The company also actively reinforced its commitment to data protection, cataloguing and evaluating every use
      of data that could be accessed by clients.

      Illustration on operations management - documenting data lineage, ensuring data quality and
      mitigating bias
      Understanding the lineage of data was also central in the accountable use of AI. Knowing this, UCARE.AI
      logged data consistently across multiple components and collected data in a secure and centralised log
      storage. In ensuring data quality, the company was also careful to transform its data into a usable format so
      that the properly formatted data could be used to build AI models. The company also prioritised creating AI



                                                                                                                80
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      models that were unique to clients, obtaining reliable datasets from the client to build models instead of using
      third-party datasets. Such a practice provided distinctions between patients’ profiles and the features selected
      for each AI model differed for each hospital, contributing to greater accuracy in the bill estimations for patients.

      Another pertinent part of AI model development was minimising the risk of bias. For this, the objective and
      consistent machine predictions gave patients customised, data-driven predictions of their hospital bills instead
      of those subjected to human biases in algorithm development.

      Illustration on Transparency in the Use of AI and Data
      To build greater confidence and trust in the use of AI, UCARE.AI was mindful to be transparent in its use of AI
      with various stakeholders. UCARE.AI not only disclosed the exact parameters used in developing the AI
      model to its clients, but also provided detailed explanations on all algorithms that had any foreseeable impact
      on operations, revenue, or customer base. UCARE.AI made a conscious decision to declare the use of AI in
      its analysis and prediction of bill amounts to Parkway’s data managers and its patients.

      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      Clients with concerns about bill predictions were also encouraged to highlight them through UCARE.AI’s
      communication channels. This gave stakeholders the necessary assurance on UCARE.AI’s policies and
      processes for responsible AI use.


        [Use case 2] Oversight, Validation & Monitoring

      UCARE.AI, a deep-tech start-up with a proprietary award-winning online ML and AI platform built on a cloud-
      based microservices architecture that provides real-time predictive insights to help insurers, hospitals,
      pharmacies and governments manage risk, reduce medical cost, and maximise efficiency, with the end goal of
      making healthcare affordable to all.

      UCARE.AI deployed its AI-Powered Cost Predictor (AlgoExpectTM) in Parkway’s four Singapore hospitals to
      provide dynamic real-time predictions of bill size at pre-admission at 82% accuracy. Based on this success,
      Parkway launched the Price Guarantee Programme for six hospital procedures. In its commitment to help
      patients with accurate cost estimations, UCARE.AI understood that trust was essential in driving adoption of
      its AI solutions. To achieve this, the company turned to the Model AI Governance Framework, aligning its
      practices in AI governance to those in the Framework to ensure reliability in its AI solutions.

      Illustration on internal governance structures and measures - defining clear roles for internal
      oversight of AI
      As a critical part of AI governance is oversight, UCARE.AI put in place certain internal governance measures,
      which includes assigning clear roles and responsibilities for the ethical development and deployment
      of AI. UCARE.AI’s projects all include a primary and secondary data science lead to concurrently develop AI
      models for the same problem statement. Once completed, the data science leads would present their results
      to UCARE.AI’s internal team, which consists of the CEO, CTO, CSO, project managers and the client services
      team for validation. During the project, UCARE.AI also conducted weekly check-ins with its clients to ensure
      quicker and more reliable iterations of its AI models. A final step before submission of the models to the client
      was to have UCARE.AI’s appointed medical advisors assess the models’ outputs for accuracy. After the
      models and its results have been submitted to the client for blind testing and approval, UCARE.AI’s QA team
      reviewed and ensured that the model was production-ready before deployment.


                                                                                                                       81
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Illustration on operations management - robust model testing and continuous monitoring of
      deployed AI models
      UCARE.AI also conducted rigorous feasibility studies before developing the Cost Predictor. These studies
      helped address potential risks such as reduced accuracy in forecasted healthcare costs. With the studies,
      UCARE.AI then worked with its clients to create a validation framework to strengthen the AI model’s accuracy,
      making sure to obtain patients’ feedback on the framework for further fine-tuning. The Cost Predictor’s AI
      model then underwent User Acceptance Testing, where the end business users from each hospital were
      invited to test the solution and provide feedback on various predictions.

      After the deployment of the Cost Predictor, UCARE.AI continuously monitored and iterated the algorithm,
      improving the data and simplifying the process for better accuracy. This continual training of the AI models
      ensured that the algorithms remained up-to-date and functioned with more precision after each data input.
      More importantly, the methodology of continuous validation of the AI models with client inputs helped to boost
      confidence in the accuracy of the AlgoExpectTM’s predictive insights.

      Illustration on Explainability in the model lifecycle
      UCARE.AI has incorporated explainability directly into the AI Cost Predictor model. Along with providing
      prediction, it is also able to tell on demand what are the important features that contribute to each prediction
      result. Client applications consuming the model’s prediction service are also able to ask the model to “explain”
      each prediction result without going through UCARE.AI’s support team. This helps users to understand the
      model predictions and provides greater transparency for the model’s performance and instils greater trust.




                                                                                                                   82
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Singapore’s National AI Office (NAIO) was established under the Smart National Digital Government Office
      (SNDGO) to set the national agenda for AI and catalyse efforts across research, industry, and Government
      stakeholders to work on national AI priorities.

      As part of its efforts to govern the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) in the public sector, NAIO has
      established guidelines for product teams in the government building custom LLM products, as well as an AI
      workgroup (with stakeholders from across government) to oversee the rigorous testing and safe deployment
      of products.

      Illustration on internal governance structures and measures – approval gates at different
      stages of LLM product development
      To encourage experimentation while also ensuring ample review of LLM products, product teams need only
      seek approval from the central AI workgroup from the beta testing phase onwards.




           Embarking on internal experiments
                                                             No approval required
           Proof-of-concepts or experiments within
           a development team



                                                             Approval gate 1

           Embarking on beta testing                         Seek approval from the central AI workgroup
                                                             prior to embarking on beta testing.
           With test users outside of the product            To maintain an agile process, teams provide key
           development team                                  product details via a form, and AI workgroup
                                                             members comment/endorse concurrently


                                                             Approval gate 2

           Deploying the product                             Seek central approval from the central AI
                                                             workgroup prior to full deployment. Teams outline
           To all intended users                             key feedback and improvements via a form, and
                                                             AI workgroup members comment/endorse
                                                             concurrently



                                                                                                         83
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Illustration on determining the level of human involvement in AI-augmented decision-making
      – determining the level of risk and corresponding mitigating measures of LLM use cases
      NAIO takes a risk-based approach when advising product teams on required mitigating measures. The level
      of risk varies, depending on AI products’:

      I. Task (productivity and language tools VS factual information retrieval) [lower risk VS higher risk]

      II. Audience (internal-facing VS external-facing) [lower risk VS higher risk]

      For example, for public-facing AI products, the product should be made robust to adversarial attack. The
      corresponding mitigating measures include the product teams engaging in efforts to increase the robustness
      of their products, such as via robustness tests to improve performance against adversarial prompts, red
      teaming or bug-bounty programmes, and rate-limiting queries so users are deterred from brute-force attacks.

      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      To mitigate the risks of misuse of LLM products, NAIO recommends that all products should include visual UX
      cues to educate users on proper use. Such visual cues include reminders to always double check and adapt
      generated output for use.

      Product teams are also encouraged to consider other education efforts such as workshops, guidebooks, and
      EDMs to raise awareness and literacy of LLM products.




                                                                                                               84
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Singapore’s Ministry of Education (MOE) formulates and implements education policies on education
      structure, curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment. It oversees the management and development of
      Government-funded schools, and the Institute of Technical Education, polytechnics, and universities.

      MOE is developing an AI-enabled Adaptive Learning System (ALS) for deployment within the Student
      Learning Space (SLS), Singapore’s national online learning portal. The ALS is one of MOE’s three
      educational AI use cases announces under the National AI Strategy launched in November 2019.

      The ALS provides a personalised learning pathway for each student, recommends learning resources,
      practice questions and customised feedback based on their level of readiness. These recommendations are
      based on the student’s mastery of pre-requisite concepts, their preferences and learning needs, responses to
      learning content, and are enhanced over time.

      Illustration on determining the level of human involvement in AI-augmented decision-making
      Students can use the ALS for self-directed learning at their own pace while teachers can monitor students’
      performance and progress through the Learning Progress Dashboard and provide timely interventions where
      necessary. For greater learning support, students can also share their ALS learning artefacts with teachers for
      feedback and guidance.

      ALS also allows teachers to recommend specific subtopics and concepts for each student and supplement
      ALS’ recommendations with their professional insights.

      Illustration on operations management – continuous monitoring of deployed AI models
      The team overseeing the ALS receives monthly reports on the models’ performance and accuracy. This
      enables the team to monitor the accuracy of ALS in recommending appropriate learning resources and ensure
      its performance remains above a pre-determined threshold.

      Illustration on stakeholder interaction and communication
      Various stakeholders were engaged for their views during the design and development of the ALS. Ideas and
      feedback from policymakers, curriculum and technical experts, as well as users (teachers and students) were
      sought and incorporated at the planning, building, and piloting phases.

      To continually improve the performance of the ALS, teachers are also able to give suggestions for
      improvements directly to MOE. Based on their feedback on wanting more control and visibility about the
      content and assessment items being presented to students, the next iteration of the ALS will enable teachers
      to add their own resources into the resource pool for recommendation to their students, enhancing the quality
      of resources and improving the ALS’ recommendation algorithm.




                                                                                                                  85
ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics




      Illustration on human-centricity
      Students’ learning readiness is a key determinant in how the ALS provides personalised and effective support
      for each learner. For example, questions are matched to the readiness of the students, so that all students are
      more likely to experience success and be motivated to learn.

      To enable this, the design team engaged in user research during a pilot phase with a small number of
      schools, and a subsequent deep dive phrase. The data collected was then used to inform the subsequent
      refinements in the design and development of the ALS.

      During development, the team also considered the choice of curriculum and pedagogical models, subject
      matter, assessment items and follow-up recommendations to enhance human centricity in the system.




                                                                                                                  86
Copyright 2024 – Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)

The contents of this publication are protected by copyright, trademark or other forms of
proprietary rights and may not be reproduced, republished or transmitted in any form or by
any means, in whole or in part, without written permission.
